And how should Dorothea not marry?
- a girl so handsome and with such prospects?
Most men thought her bewitching when she was on horseback.
To her relief, Dorothea's eyes were full of laughter as she looked up.
You know, he said that he had forgotten them till then.
"Well, dear, we should never wear them, you know.
" Dorothea spoke in a full cordial tone, half caressing, half explanatory.
Celia coloured, and looked very grave.
"You would like to wear them?
"Of course, then, let us have them out.
Why did you not tell me before?
"Pray open the large drawer of the cabinet and get out the jewel-box.
"There, Celia! you can wear that with your Indian muslin.
But this cross you must wear with your dark dresses.
Celia was trying not to smile with pleasure.
"O Dodo, you must keep the cross yourself.
"No, no, dear, no," said Dorothea, putting up her hand with careless deprecation.
"Not for the world, not for the world.
A cross is the last thing I would wear as a trinket.
"No, dear, no," said Dorothea, stroking her sister's cheek.
"Souls have complexions too: what will suit one will not suit another.
"But you might like to keep it for mamma's sake.
In fact, they are all yours, dear.
We need discuss them no longer.
There - take away your property.
Celia felt a little hurt.
Celia had unclasped the necklace and drawn it off.
They look like fragments of heaven.
I think that emerald is more beautiful than any of them.
"And there is a bracelet to match it," said Celia.
"We did not notice this at first.
"You must keep that ring and bracelet - if nothing else.
But see, these agates are very pretty and quiet.
"Yes! I will keep these - this ring and bracelet," said Dorothea.
"Yes, dear, I will keep these," said Dorothea, decidedly.
"But take all the rest away, and the casket.
"Shall you wear them in company?
Dorothea glanced quickly at her sister.
"Perhaps," she said, rather haughtily.
"I cannot tell to what level I may sink.
But Dorothea is not always consistent.
Dorothea saw that she had been in the wrong, and Celia pardoned her.
Now there was something singular.
There's an oddity in things, now.
But Davy was there: he was a poet too.
That was true in every sense, you know.
Dorothea felt a little more uneasy than usual.
She wondered how a man like Mr Casaubon would support such triviality.
Do you approve of that, Miss Brooke?
"A great mistake, Chettam," interposed Mr.
It leads to everything; you can let nothing alone.
"I remember when we were all reading Adam Smith.
There is a book, now.
I pulled up; I pulled up in time.
But talking of books, there is Southey's Peninsular War.
I am reading that of a morning.
"I have little leisure for such literature just now.
But I find it necessary to use the utmost caution about my eyesight.
This was the first time that Mr Casaubon had spoken at any length.
Dorothea said to herself that Mr.
It has been trained for a lady.
"Thank you, you are very good.
I mean to give up riding.
"Your sister is given to self-mortification, is she not?
" he continued, turning to Celia, who sat at his right hand?
"If that were true, Celia, my giving-up would be self-indulgence, not self-mortification.
"You give up from some high, generous motive.
I did not say that of myself," answered Dorothea, reddening.
Unlike Celia, she rarely blushed, and only from high delight or anger.
At this moment she felt angry with the perverse Sir James.
"I know something of all schools.
I knew Wilberforce in his best days.
Mr Casaubon bowed, and observed that it was a wide field.
"Yes," said Mr Brooke, with an easy smile, "but I have documents.
I began a long while ago to collect documents.
I have documents at my back.
But now, how do you arrange your documents?
"In pigeon-holes partly," said Mr Casaubon, with rather a startled air of effort.
"Ah, pigeon-holes will not do.
Young ladies are too flighty.
When the two girls were in the drawing-room alone, Celia said -.
"How very ugly Mr Casaubon is!".
"Celia! He is one of the most distinguished-looking men I ever saw.
He is remarkably like the portrait of Locke.
He has the same deep eye-sockets.
"Had Locke those two white moles with hairs on them?
"Mr Casaubon is so sallow.
"Dodo!" exclaimed Celia, looking after her in surprise.
"I never heard you make such a comparison before.
"Why should I make it before the occasion came?
It is a good comparison: the match is perfect?
Miss Brooke was clearly forgetting herself, and Celia thought so.
"I wonder you show temper, Dorothea.
"Has Mr Casaubon a great soul?
" Celia was not without a touch of naive malice?
"Yes, I believe he has," said Dorothea, with the full voice of decision.
"Everything I see in him corresponds to his pamphlet on Biblical Cosmology.
"He talks very little," said Celia.
"There is no one for him to talk to.
" Celia felt that this was a pity.
She had never been deceived as to the object of the baronet's interest.
"I assure you, riding is the most healthy of exercises.
"I am aware of it," said Dorothea, coldly.
"But you are such a perfect horsewoman.
"Then that is a reason for more practice.
"You see how widely we differ, Sir James.
"I should like to know your reasons for this cruel resolution.
It is not possible that you should think horsemanship wrong.
"It is quite possible that I should think it wrong for me.
" said Sir James, in a tender tone of remonstrance?
We must keep the germinating grain away from the light.
Dorothea coloured with pleasure, and looked up gratefully to the speaker.
"Certainly," said good Sir James.
I am sure her reasons would do her honor.
Dorothea was altogether captivated by the wide embrace of this conception.
"Look here - here is all about Greece.
Rhamnus, the ruins of Rhamnus - you are a great Grecian, now.
I don't know whether you have given much study to the topography.
Here, now! - `We started the next morning for Parnassus, the double-peaked Parnassus.
Bernard dog, who always took care of the young ladies in their walks.
This was a trait of Miss Brooke's asceticism.
What could she do, what ought she to do?
From such contentment poor Dorothea was shut out.
There would be nothing trivial about our lives.
Every-day things with us would mean the greatest things.
It would be like marrying Pascal.
"It has hastened the pleasure I was looking forward to.
Miss Brooke was annoyed at the interruption.
" said Sir James, as they walked forward?
They are too helpless: their lives are too frail.
A weasel or a mouse that gets its own living is more interesting.
Here, John, take this dog, will you?
But she felt it necessary to explain.
"You must not judge of Celia's feeling from mine.
I think she likes these small pets.
She had a tiny terrier once, which she was very fond of.
It made me unhappy, because I was afraid of treading on it.
What answer was possible to such stupid complimenting?
"I don't quite understand what you mean.
"Your power of forming an opinion.
I can form an opinion of persons.
I know when I like people.
One hears very sensible things said on opposite sides.
Perhaps we don't always discriminate between sense and nonsense.
Dorothea felt that she was rather rude.
"But you seem to have the power of discrimination.
"On the contrary, I am often unable to decide.
But that is from ignorance.
"I think there are few who would see it more readily.
You had a real GENUS, to use his expression.
Of course, it is sinking money; that is why people object to it.
Labourers can never pay rent to make it answer.
But, after all, it is worth doing.
"Worth doing! yes, indeed," said Dorothea, energetically, forgetting her previous small vexations.
"Will you show me your plan?
I dare say it is very faulty.
Dorothea was in the best temper now.
She had been engrossing Sir James.
And how very uncomfortable Sir James would be! I cannot bear notions.
It was Celia's private luxury to indulge in this dislike.
On one - only one - of her favourite themes she was disappointed.
Should she not urge these arguments on Mr Casaubon when he came again?
Sir James said "Exactly," and she bore the word remarkably well.
"You mean that he appears silly.
"They must be very dreadful to live with.
Only think! at breakfast, and always.
"Of course people need not be always talking well.
"You mean that Sir James tries and fails.
Why do you catechise me about Sir James?
It is not the object of his life to please me?
"Now, Dodo, can you really believe that?
He thinks of me as a future sister - that is all.
Celia blushed, but said at once -.
"Pray do not make that mistake any longer, Dodo.
Cadwallader's maid that Sir James was to marry the eldest Miss Brooke.
"How can you let Tantripp talk such gossip to you, Celia?
"You must have asked her questions.
"I see no harm at all in Tantripp's talking to me.
It is better to hear what people say.
You see what mistakes you make by taking up notions.
And uncle too - I know he expects it.
There was vexation too on account of Celia.
"How could he expect it?
" she burst forth in her most impetuous manner?
"Fond of him, Celia! How can you choose such odious expressions?
"Well, I am sorry for Sir James.
"It is very painful," said Dorothea, feeling scourged.
"I can have no more to do with the cottages.
I must be uncivil to him.
I must tell him I will have nothing to do with them.
" Her eyes filled again with tears.
There will be nobody besides Lovegood.
" Celia could not help relenting.
"Poor Dodo," she went on, in an amiable staccato.
"It is very hard: it is your favorite FAD to draw plans.
I may well make mistakes?
We thought you would have been at home to lunch.
They were pamphlets about the early Church.
This fundamental principle of human speech was markedly exhibited in Mr Brooke.
"I lunched there and saw Casaubon's library, and that kind of thing.
There's a sharp air, driving.
Won't you sit down, my dear?
Dorothea felt quite inclined to accept the invitation.
They were not thin hands, or small hands; but powerful, feminine, maternal hands.
She bethought herself now of the condemned criminal.
"What news have you brought about the sheep-stealer, uncle?
Dorothea's brow took an expression of reprobation and pity.
"Hanged, you know," said Mr Brooke, with a quiet nod.
"Poor Romilly! he would have helped us.
He is a little buried in books, you know, Casaubon is.
How can he go about making acquaintances?
But a man mopes, you know.
I never moped: but I can see that Casaubon does, you know.
He wants a companion - a companion, you know.
" said Mr Brooke, without showing any surprise, or other emotion?
"Well, now, I've known Casaubon ten years, ever since he came to Lowick.
But I never got anything out of him - any ideas, you know.
And he has a very high opinion of you, my dear.
"The fact is, he has a very high opinion indeed of you.
And he speaks uncommonly well - does Casaubon.
He has deferred to me, you not being of age.
I was bound to tell him that.
I said, my niece is very young, and that kind of thing.
But I didn't think it necessary to go into everything.
"I thought it better to tell you, my dear.
"Thank you, uncle," said Dorothea, in a clear unwavering tone.
"I am very grateful to Mr Casaubon.
If he makes me an offer, I shall accept him.
I admire and honor him more than any man I ever saw.
Well! He is a good match in some respects.
But now, Chettam is a good match.
And our land lies together.
I shall never interfere against your wishes, my dear.
I have always said that, up to a certain point.
I mention it, you know.
"It is impossible that I should ever marry Sir James Chettam," said Dorothea.
"If he thinks of marrying me, he has made a great mistake.
"That is it, you see.
Here was a fellow like Chettam with no chance at all.
There is no hurry - I mean for you.
It's true, every year will tell upon him.
He is over five-and-forty, you know.
I should say a good seven-and-twenty years older than you.
I know nothing else against him.
Mr Brooke repeated his subdued, "Ah?
- I thought you had more of your own opinion than most girls?
I thought you liked your own opinion - liked it, you know.
It IS a noose, you know.
And a husband likes to be master.
"I know that I must expect trials, uncle.
Marriage is a state of higher duties.
I never thought of it as mere personal ease," said poor Dorothea.
I can see that Casaubon's ways might suit you better than Chettam's.
And you shall do as you like, my dear.
I did, when I was his age.
I think he has hurt them a little with too much reading.
"You have quite made up your mind, I see.
Think about it, you know.
It was his duty to do so.
In any case, I shall remain, yours with sincere devotion,.
She remained in that attitude till it was time to dress for dinner.
Why should she defer the answer?
"Have you thought enough about this, my dear?
" he said at last?
"There was no need to think long, uncle.
I know of nothing to make me vacillate.
"Ah! - then you have accepted him?
Then Chettam has no chance?
Has Chettam offended you - offended you, you know?
What is it you don't like in Chettam?
"There is nothing that I like in him," said Dorothea, rather impetuously.
Dorothea immediately felt some self-rebuke, and said -.
"I mean in the light of a husband.
He is very kind, I think - really very good about the cottages.
"But you must have a scholar, and that sort of thing?
Well, it lies a little in our family?
I went a good deal into that, at one time.
I couldn't, as your guardian, have consented to a bad match.
But Casaubon stands well: his position is good.
I am afraid Chettam will be hurt, though, and Mrs.
That evening, of course, Celia knew nothing of what had happened.
"Celia, dear, come and kiss me," holding her arms open as she spoke.
"No, dear, I am very, very happy," said Dorothea, fervently.
"So much the better," thought Celia.
"But how strangely Dodo goes from one extreme to the other.
"Is any one else coming to dine besides Mr Casaubon?
"Not that I know of.
"I hope there is some one else.
Then I shall not hear him eat his soup so.
"What is there remarkable about his soup-eating?
"Really, Dodo, can't you hear how he scrapes his spoon?
And he always blinks before he speaks?
"Many things are true which only the commonest minds observe.
"Then I think the commonest minds must be rather useful.
Perhaps Celia had never turned so pale before.
When she spoke there was a tear gathering.
"Oh, Dodo, I hope you will be happy.
Dorothea was still hurt and agitated.
"It is quite decided, then?
" said Celia, in an awed under tone?
"I have accepted Mr Casaubon's offer.
She never could have thought that she should feel as she did.
"Never mind, Kitty, do not grieve.
We should never admire the same people.
Nevertheless before the evening was at an end she was very happy.
) that he should be the object of it?
I shall gain enough if you will take me with you there.
Mr Casaubon's house was ready?
" in the nick of time?
"Well, Mrs Fitchett, how are your fowls laying now?
" said the high-coloured, dark-eyed lady, with the clearest chiselled utterance?
"Oh, the cannibals! Better sell them cheap at once.
What will you sell them a couple?
One can't eat fowls of a bad character at a high price?
"Well, madam, half-a-crown: I couldn't let 'em go, not under.
"Half-a-crown, these times! Come now - for the Rector's chicken-broth on a Sunday.
He has consumed all ours that I can spare.
You are half paid with the sermon, Mrs Fitchett, remember that.
Take a pair of tumbler-pigeons for them - little beauties.
You must come and see them.
You have no tumblers among your pigeons.
"Well, madam, Master Fitchett shall go and see 'em after work.
He's very hot on new sorts; to oblige you.
"Oblige me! It will be the best bargain he ever made.
"Casaubon and I don't talk politics much.
He only cares about Church questions.
That is not my line of action, you know.
"Ra-a-ther too much, my friend.
I have heard of your doings.
I believe you bought it on purpose?
You are a perfect Guy Faux.
See if you are not burnt in effigy this 5th of November coming.
You will lose yourself, I forewarn you.
But that is what you ladies never understand.
"Where your certain point is?
That was what he said.
Why, any upstart who has got neither blood nor position?
Certainly a man can only be cosmopolitan up to a certain point?
" said Mrs Cadwallader, with a sharp note of surprise?
"It is hardly a fortnight since you and I were talking about it.
"My niece has chosen another suitor - has chosen him, you know.
I have had nothing to do with it.
But there is no accounting for these things.
Your sex is capricious, you know.
" Mrs Cadwallader's mind was rapidly surveying the possibilities of choice for Dorothea?
"My dear child, what is this?
- this about your sister's engagement?
How long has it been going on?
"I only knew of it yesterday.
They are to be married in six weeks.
"Well, my dear, I wish you joy of your brother-in-law.
"I am so sorry for Dorothea.
"Sorry! It is her doing, I suppose.
"Yes; she says Mr Casaubon has a great soul.
"Well, my dear, take warning.
"I'm sure I never should.
"No; one such in a family is enough.
So your sister never cared about Sir James Chettam?
What would you have said to him for a brother-in-law?
"I should have liked that very much.
I am sure he would have been a good husband.
Sir James never seemed to please her.
"She must have encouraged him, I am sure.
That is not very creditable.
"Please don't be angry with Dodo; she does not see things.
Your uncle will never tell him.
We are all disappointed, my dear.
Young people should think of their families in marrying.
However, Casaubon has money enough; I must do him that justice.
I want to send my young cook to learn of her.
I have no doubt Mrs Carter will oblige me.
Sir James's cook is a perfect dragon.
It was of no use protesting, against Mrs Cadwallader's way of putting things.
But Sir James's countenance changed a little.
He felt a vague alarm.
"I do believe Brooke is going to expose himself after all.
" said Sir James, much relieved?
"He might be dissuaded, I should think.
He would not like the expense.
"That is what I told him.
I really feel a little responsible.
I always told you Miss Brooke would be such a fine match.
But these things wear out of girls.
However, I am taken by surprise for once.
"What do you mean, Mrs Cadwallader?
"What has happened to Miss Brooke?
She is engaged to be married.
Sir James let his whip fall and stooped to pick it up.
You know my errand now.
"She says, he is a great soul.
- A great bladder for dried peas to rattle in!" said Mrs Cadwallader.
"What business has an old bachelor like that to marry?
"He has one foot in the grave.
"He means to draw it out again, I suppose.
She would think better of it then.
What is a guardian for?
"As if you could ever squeeze a resolution out of Brooke!".
"Cadwallader might talk to him.
I hide it as well as I can by abusing everybody myself?
For this marriage to Casaubon is as good as going to a nunnery.
"Well, Humphrey doesn't know yet.
Casaubon is a good fellow - and young - young enough?
The truth is, you have been courting one and have won the other.
But now I wish her joy of her hair shirt.
Smile like the knot of cowslips on the cliff,.
Not to be come at by the willing hand.
"Could I not be preparing myself now to be more useful?
I hope you don't expect me to be naughty and stupid?
Dorothea seized this as a precious permission.
Miss Brooke was certainly very naive with all her alleged cleverness.
Few scholars would have disliked teaching the alphabet under such circumstances.
"Dorothea is learning to read the characters simply," said Mr.
"She had the very considerate thought of saving my eyes.
"Ah, well, without understanding, you know - that may not be so bad.
But I'm a conservative in music - it's not like ideas, you know.
I stick to the good old tunes.
She smiled and looked up at her betrothed with grateful eyes.
"Ah, there you are behind Celia, my dear.
Celia, now, plays very prettily, and is always ready to play.
However, since Casaubon does not like it, you are all right.
"No; but music of that sort I should enjoy," said Dorothea.
"That kind of thing is not healthy, my dear," said Mr Brooke.
However, the match is good.
He is pretty certain to be a bishop, is Casaubon.
They owe him a deanery.
Brooke was really culpable; he ought to have hindered it.
Who could speak to him?
Something might be done perhaps even now, at least to defer the marriage?
" he said, showing a hand not quite fit to be grasped?
"Sorry I missed you before.
"It is only this conduct of Brooke's.
I really think somebody should speak to him.
"I hardly think he means it.
But where's the harm, if he likes it?
I mean his letting that blooming young girl marry Casaubon.
"What is the matter with Casaubon?
I see no harm in him - if the girl likes him?
"She is too young to know what she likes.
Her guardian ought to interfere.
"You are as bad as Elinor.
"But look at Casaubon," said Sir James, indignantly.
They don't admire you half so much as you admire yourselves.
"You! it was easy enough for a woman to love you.
But this is no question of beauty.
what do you know against him?
At last he said -.
"Now, Cadwallader, has he got any heart?
Casaubon acts up to his sense of justice.
You would, Chettam; but not every man.
"I don't know," said Sir James, colouring.
"I am not so sure of myself.
A woman may not be happy with him.
You laugh, because you fancy I have some feeling on my own account.
But upon my honour, it is not that.
"Well, but what should you do?
And depend upon it, in that case, it would never come off.
"I hear what you are talking about," said the wife.
"But you will make no impression on Humphrey.
"It is a very good quality in a man to have a trout-stream.
"I have done what I could: I wash my hands of the marriage.
"He might keep shape long enough to defer the marriage," said Sir James.
I know no harm of Casaubon?
"Humphrey! I have no patience with you.
You know you would rather dine under the hedge than with Casaubon alone.
You have nothing to say to each other.
"What has that to do with Miss Brooke's marrying him?
She does not do it for my amusement?
"He has got no good red blood in his body," said Sir James.
"Oh, he dreams footnotes, and they run away with all his brains.
"Well, he is what Miss Brooke likes," said the Rector.
"I don't profess to understand every young lady's taste.
"But if she were your own daughter?
"That would be a different affair.
She is not my daughter, and I don't feel called upon to interfere.
Casaubon is as good as most of us.
He is a scholarly clergyman, and creditable to the cloth.
" The Rector ended with his silent laugh.
He always saw the joke of any satire against himself.
Mr Casaubon's home was the manor-house.
Dorothea walked about the house with delightful emotion.
All appeals to her taste she met gratefully, but saw nothing to alter.
His efforts at exact courtesy and formal tenderness had no defect for her.
I have no motive for wishing anything else.
"Oh, Dodo," said Celia, "will you not have the bow-windowed room up-stairs?
Mr Casaubon led the way thither.
The chairs and tables were thin-legged and easy to upset.
"No, uncle," said Dorothea, eagerly.
"Pray do not speak of altering anything.
And you like them as they are, don't you?
" she added, looking at Mr Casaubon?
"Perhaps this was your mother's room when she was young.
"It was," he said, with his slow bend of the head.
And this one opposite, who is this?
"It is a peculiar face," said Dorothea, looking closely.
Altogether it seems to me peculiar rather than pretty.
There is not even a family likeness between her and your mother.
And they were not alike in their lot.
"You did not mention her to me," said Dorothea.
"My aunt made an unfortunate marriage.
"Shall we not walk in the garden now?
"And you would like to see the church, you know," said Mr Brooke.
"It is a droll little church.
It all lies in a nut-shell.
"There may be a young gardener, you know - why not?
"I told Casaubon he should change his gardener.
"No, not a gardener," said Celia; "a gentleman with a sketch-book.
I only saw his back.
But he was quite young.
"The curate's son, perhaps," said Mr Brooke.
"Ah, there is Casaubon again, and Tucker with him.
He is going to introduce Tucker.
You don't know Tucker yet.
The French eat a good many fowls - skinny fowls, you know.
"I think it was a very cheap wish of his," said Dorothea, indignantly.
But perhaps he wished them to have fat fowls.
Dorothea sank into silence on the way back to the house.
"You seem a little sad, Dorothea.
I trust you are pleased with what you have seen.
I have known so few ways of making my life good for anything.
Of course, my notions of usefulness must be narrow.
I must learn new ways of helping people.
"Each position has its corresponding duties.
"Indeed, I believe that," said Dorothea, earnestly.
"Do not suppose that I am sad.
"Who is that youngster, Casaubon?
They had come very near when Mr Casaubon answered -.
The young man had laid down his sketch-book and risen.
"Dorothea, let me introduce to you my cousin, Mr Ladislaw.
Will, this is Miss Brooke.
"No, I only sketch a little.
"Oh, come, this is a nice bit, now.
I did a little in this way myself at one time, you know.
They are a language I do not understand.
This must be one of Nature's inconsistencies.
But he turned from her, and bowed his thanks for Mr Brooke's invitation.
"We will turn over my Italian engravings together," continued that good-natured man.
One gets rusty in this part of the country, you know.
You clever young men must guard against indolence.
"What is your nephew going to do with himself, Casaubon?
Brooke, as they went on.
"My cousin, you mean - not my nephew.
But in the way of a career, you know.
"The answer to that question is painfully doubtful.
He declines to choose a profession.
"He has no means but what you furnish, I suppose.
"I had a notion of that myself at one time.
People's lives and fortunes depend on them?
She was surprised to find that Mr Casaubon could say something quite amusing.
I shall let him be tried by the test of freedom.
They may seem idle and weak because they are growing?
We should be very patient with each other, I think.
"You mean that I am very impatient, Celia.
"Yes; when people don't do and say just what you like.
Even Cæsar's fortune at one time was but a grand presentiment.
Let him start for the Continent, then, without our pronouncing on his future.
Among all forms of mistake, prophecy is the most gratuitous.
Did not an immortal physicist and interpreter of hieroglyphs write detestable verses?
And his was that worst loneliness which would shrink from sympathy.
Surely learned men kept-the only oil; and who more learned than Mr Casaubon?
The words "I should feel more at liberty" grated on Dorothea.
For the first time in speaking to Mr Casaubon she coloured from annoyance.
"I beg you will not refer to this again," said Dorothea, rather haughtily.
I shall have so much to think of when I am alone.
And Tantripp will be a sufficient companion, just to take care of me.
I could not bear to have Celia: she would be miserable.
It was time to dress.
A man likes a sort of challenge.
The more of a dead set she makes at you the better.
"There's some truth in that," said Mr.
Standish, disposed to be genial.
"And, by God, it's usually the way with them.
I suppose it answers some wise ends: Providence made them so, eh, Bulstrode?
"I should be disposed to refer coquetry to another source," said Mr Bulstrode.
"I should rather refer it to the devil.
"And I like them blond, with a certain gait, and a swan neck.
"Where can all the strength of those medicines go, my dear?
And I think what you say is reasonable.
You have two sorts of potatoes, fed on the same soil.
One of them grows more and more watery - ".
"Ah! like this poor Mrs Renfrew - that is what I think.
Dropsy! There is no swelling yet - it is inward.
I should say she ought to take drying medicines, shouldn't you?
- or a dry hot-air bath?
Many things might be tried, of a drying nature.
"He does not want drying.
"And then his studies - so very dry, as you say.
"How very shocking! I fear she is headstrong.
"However, James will hear nothing against Miss Brooke.
He says she is the mirror of women still.
"That is a generous make-believe of his.
Depend upon it, he likes little Celia better, and she appreciates him.
I hope you like my little Celia?
But we were talking of physic.
Tell me about this new young surgeon, Mr Lydgate.
I heard him talking to Humphrey.
One does not expect it in a practitioner of that kind.
He was coarse and butcher-like, but he knew my constitution.
It was a loss to me his going off so suddenly.
I want to test him.
Yet Lady Chettam gathered much confidence in him.
- dear me! - who is that?
"This young Lydgate, the new doctor.
He seems to me to understand his profession admirably.
"Hang it, do you think that is quite sound?
- upsetting The old treatment, which has made Englishmen what they re?
I like treatment that has been tested a little.
"Oh, if you talk in that sense!" said Mr.
Mr Lydgate, of course, was out of hearing.
"It is troublesome to talk to such women.
But Lydgate was young, poor, ambitious.
She did not look at things from the proper feminine angle.
Destiny stands by sarcastic with our dramatis personae folded in her hand.
But these things made only part of her charm.
Rosamond silently wished that her father would invite Mr Lydgate.
"Not tetchy, mamma: you never hear me speak in an unladylike way.
"Well, but you want to deny them things.
"Oh, my dear, you must allow for young men.
Be thankful if they have good hearts.
A woman must learn to put up with little things.
You will be married some day.
"Not to any one who is like Fred.
"Don't decry your own brother, my dear.
You are always finding fault with Bob because he is not Fred.
"Oh no, mamma, only because he is Bob.
She herself thought unfavourably of these dimples and smiled little in general society.
"But I shall not marry any Middlemarch young man.
"Why, what else are they?
"I mean, mamma, it is rather a vulgar expression.
"Very likely, my dear; I never was a good speaker.
"Why, that seems just as plain and common.
' But with your education you must know.
"What must Rosy know, mother?
"Oh, there are so many superior teas and sugars now.
Superior is getting to be shopkeepers' slang.
"Are you beginning to dislike slang, then?
" said Rosamond, with mild gravity?
All choice of words is slang.
"There is correct English: that is not slang.
And the strongest slang of all is the slang of poets.
"You will say anything, Fred, to gain your point.
"Of course you can call it poetry if you like.
"Aha, Miss Rosy, you don't know Homer from slang.
"Have you got nothing else for my breakfast, Pritchard?
"Should you like eggs, sir?
"Eggs, no! Bring me a grilled bone.
"That is your want of understanding, Rosy.
I can get up to go hunting because I like it.
"I don't make myself disagreeable; it is you who find me so.
Disagreeable is a word that describes your feelings and not my actions.
"I think it describes the smell of grilled bone.
She is my notion of a pleasant woman.
"Come, Fred, tell us all about the new doctor.
How is your uncle pleased with him?
Ah, here comes my grilled bone.
"But how came you to stay out so late, my dear?
You only said you were going to your uncle's?
"Oh, I dined at Plymdale's.
"And what do you think of him?
He is very gentlemanly, I suppose?
They say he is of excellent family - his relations quite county people.
"There was a Lydgate at John's who spent no end of money.
I find this man is a second cousin of his.
But rich men may have very poor devils for second cousins.
But now, tell us exactly what sort of man he is.
"Oh, tallish, dark, clever - talks well - rather a prig, I think.
"I never can make out what you mean by a prig," said Rosamond.
"A fellow who wants to show that he has opinions.
"Why, my dear, doctors must have opinions," said Mrs Vincy.
"What are they there for else?
"Yes, mother, the opinions they are paid for.
"I wish you would not be so vulgar, Fred.
If you have finished, pray ring the bell.
And Mr Featherstone's first wife brought him no money, as my sister did.
Her nieces and nephews can't have so much claim as my sister's.
"Well, my dear," said Mrs.
"There's a fire in the smoking-room on purpose.
Fred drew his mother's hand down to his lips, but said nothing.
"I suppose you are not going out riding to-day?
" said Rosamond, lingering a little after her mamma was gone?
"Papa says I may have the chestnut to ride now.
"You can go with me to-morrow, if you like.
Only I am going to Stone Court, remember.
" Rosamond really wished to go to Stone Court, of all other places.
"Pray do not ask me this morning.
"Really, Fred, I wish you would leave off playing the flute.
A man looks very silly playing the flute.
And you play so out of tune.
"And why should you expect me to take you out riding?
That gig seems to me more funereal than a hearse.
But then Mrs Waule always has black crape on.
How does she manage it, Rosy?
Her friends can't always be dying?
"I don't know at all.
"And, not poor," she added, after a moment's pause.
But I believe he hates them all.
"What are you driving at there?
"The doctors can't master that cough, brother.
"Tchah! you said nothing o' the sort.
You said somebody had made free with my name.
"And no more than can be proved, if what everybody says is true.
"Nonsense! What's a game at billiards?
It's a good gentlemanly game; and young Vincy is not a clodhopper?
I don't bank with him?
And it's openly said that young Vincy has raised money on his expectations.
I don't say what expectations.
Miss Garth hears me, and is welcome to tell again.
I know young people hang together.
"No, thank you, Mrs Waule," said Mary Garth.
"I dislike hearing scandal too much to wish to repeat it.
Still looking at the fire, he said -.
"And who pretends to say Fred Vincy hasn't got expectations?
Such a fine, spirited fellow is like enough to have 'em?
" Here Mrs Waule's tears fell, but with moderation?
"Come, out with it, Jane!" said Mr Featherstone, looking at her.
And he had it from most undeniable authority, and not one, but many.
"Stuff and nonsense! I don't believe a word of it.
It's all a got-up story.
Go to the window, Missy; I thought I heard a horse.
See if the doctor's coming.
But Solomon makes it no secret what he means to do.
"Heyday, miss!" he said at last, "you have a fine colour.
He will be in presently.
Mrs Waule, you'd better go.
Solomon says there's great talk of his cleverness.
I'm sure it's my wish you should be spared.
There's Rebecca, and Joanna, and Elizabeth, you know.
They'd need have some money, eh?
A warm man was Waule.
But we are frightened at much that is not strictly conceivable.
"You two misses go away," said Mr Featherstone.
"I want to speak to Fred.
Indeed, this tète-à-tète was one of Rosamond's objects in coming to Stone Court.
Old Featherstone would not begin the dialogue till the door had been closed.
You put my life at a twelvemonth, say?
But I can alter my will yet.
He had not borrowed money in that way, for excellent reasons.
"I don't know what you refer to, sir.
I have certainly never borrowed any money on such an insecurity.
"No, sir, it's you must explain.
I can alter my will yet, let me tell you.
I say, you must contradict this story.
"But I contradict it again.
The story is a silly lie.
"Nonsense! you must bring dockiments.
It's that fine, religious, charitable uncle o' yours.
Come now!" Here Mr Featherstone had his peculiar inward shake which signified merriment.
Do they pretend that he named the man who lent me the money?
"If there is such a man, depend upon it Bulstrode knows him.
Fred felt himself to be in a disgusting dilemma.
"You must be joking, sir.
" But he was disappointed in the result.
"Ay, I know what you mean.
You'd sooner offend me than Bulstrode.
- he's got no land hereabout that ever I heard tell of?
And that's what his religion means: he wants God A'mighty to come in.
But you take the other side.
You like Bulstrode and speckilation better than Featherstone and land.
"I like neither Bulstrode nor speculation.
" He spoke rather sulkily, feeling himself stalemated.
It's all one to me.
It's all one to me.
"I am not ungrateful, sir.
Come now! That's a bargain.
Here, give me your arm.
I'll try and walk round the room.
"Read me the names o' the books.
Come now! you're a college man.
Fred gave him the titles.
"What did Missy want with more books?
What must you be bringing her more books for?
She is very fond of reading.
"A little too fond," said Mr Featherstone, captiously.
"She was for reading when she sat with me.
But I put a stop to that.
She's got the newspaper to read out loud.
That's enough for one day, I should think.
I can't abide to see her reading to herself.
You mind and not bring her any more books, do you hear?
" Fred had received this order before, and had secretly disobeyed it.
He intended to disobey it again.
"Ring the bell," said Mr Featherstone; "I want Missy to come down.
Rosamond and Mary had been talking faster than their male friends.
"You mean my beauty," said Mary, rather sardonically.
Rosamond thought, "Poor Mary, she takes the kindest things ill.
" Aloud she said, "What have you been doing lately?
"It is a wretched life for you.
"No," said Mary, curtly, with a little toss of her head.
"I think my life is pleasanter than your Miss Morgan's.
"Yes; but Miss Morgan is so uninteresting, and not young.
"No," said Rosamond, reflectively; "one wonders what such people do, without any prospect.
To be sure, there is religion as a support.
But," she added, dimpling, "it is very different with you,'Mary.
You may have an offer.
"Has any one told you he means to make me one?
"Does that always make people fall in love?
"Not when they are interesting and agreeable.
I hear that Mr Lydgate is both.
"Oh, Mr Lydgate!" said Mary, with an unmistakable lapse into indifference.
"Merely, how you like him.
"There is no question of liking at present.
My liking always wants some little kindness to kindle it.
" said Rosamond, with heightened satisfaction?
"You know that he is of good family?
"No; he did not give that as a reason.
"Mary! you are the oddest girl.
But what sort of looking man is he?
"How can one describe a man?
But you will see him.
You know this is about the time of his visits.
Rosamond blushed a little, but said, meditatively, "I rather like a haughty manner.
I cannot endure a rattling young man.
"Haughtiness is not conceit; I call Fred conceited.
"I wish no one said any worse of him.
He should be more careful.
Mrs Waule has been telling uncle that Fred is very unsteady.
But she purposely abstained from mentioning Mrs Waule's more special insinuation.
"Oh, Fred is horrid!" said Rosamond.
"What do you mean by horrid?
"I think Fred is quite right.
"How can you say he is quite right, Mary?
I thought you had more sense of religion?
"He is not fit to be a clergyman.
"But he ought to be fit.
"Well, then, he is not what he ought to be.
I know some other people who are in the same case.
"But no one approves of them.
I should not like to marry a clergyman; but there must be clergymen.
"It does not follow that Fred must be one.
"I can suppose that very well," said Mary, dryly.
"But of course if he were a clergyman, he must be different.
"Yes, he would be a great hypocrite; and he is not that yet.
"It is of no use saying anything to you, Mary.
You always take Fred's part.
"Why should I not take his part?
" said Mary, lighting up?
He is the only person who takes the least trouble to oblige me.
"What would you not tell her?
"Pray do not go into a rage, Mary," said Rosamond, mildly as ever.
But he is not going to do so, that I am aware.
He certainly never has asked me.
"Mary, you are always so violent.
"And you are always so exasperating.
What can you blame me for?
"Oh, blameless people are always the most exasperating.
There is the bell - I think we must go down.
"I did not mean to quarrel," said Rosamond, putting on her hat.
Nonsense; we have not quarrelled?
"Am I to repeat what you have said?
I never say what I am afraid of having repeated.
But let us go down.
But Mary from some cause looked rather out of temper.
"I like it better than your physic.
"Fred, we must really go.
"Miss Vincy is a musician?
" said Lydgate, following her with his eyes?
Speak up for your sister?
"I'm afraid I'm out of court, sir.
My evidence would be good for nothing.
Lydgate was quick in anticipating her.
Such ruminations naturally produced a streak of misanthropic bitterness.
He said to Rosamond, as they slackened their pace -.
"Rosy, did Mary tell you that Mrs Waule had said anything about me?
"That you were very unsteady.
"I should think that was enough, Fred.
"You are sure she said no more?
But really, Fred, I think you ought to be ashamed.
"Oh, fudge! Don't lecture me.
What did Mary say about it?
"I am not obliged to tell you.
"Of course I care what Mary says.
She is the best girl I know.
"How do you know what men would fall in love with?
"She might have waited till I did ask her.
"I knew it would nettle you, Fred.
She would not have said so if you had not provoked her.
Such joys are reserved for conscious merit.
But this proud openness was made lovable by an expression of unaffected good-will.
You recognize, I hope; the existence of spiritual interests in your patients?
But those words are apt to cover different meanings to different minds.
And on such subjects wrong teaching is as fatal as no teaching.
The building stands in Mr Farebrother's parish.
He gave me his vote.
I must call to thank him.
He seems a very bright pleasant little fellow.
And I understand he is a naturalist.
"Mr Farebrother, my dear sir, is a man deeply painful to contemplate.
" Mr Bulstrode paused and looked meditative.
" Lydgate smiled, but he was bent on being circumspect.
"I hope I shall have nothing to do with clerical disputes," said Lydgate.
"The path I have chosen is to work well in my own profession.
"My responsibility, Mr Lydgate, is of a broader kind.
"There we certainly differ," said Lydgate.
"I cannot persuade you to adopt my regimen, Vincy?
"No, no; I've no opinion of that system.
Life wants padding," said Mr Vincy, unable to omit his portable theory.
"I hope not this time.
" (Mr Vincy was resolved to be good-humoured.
) "The fact is, it's about a whim of old Featherstone's.
You are now reaping the consequences.
And this particular reproof irritated him more than any other.
"As to that, Bulstrode, it's no use going back.
I'm not one of your pattern men, and I don't pretend to be.
I think I was justified in what I tried to do for Fred.
I suppose you don't conduct business on what you call unworldly principles.
"You had some more particular business.
Of course you never said any such nonsense.
I suppose you can have no objection to do that.
He is not a liar.
I don't want to make him better than he is.
But he is not a liar.
Mr Bulstrode paused a little before he answered.
"You pain me very much by speaking in this way, Vincy.
I take the world as I find it, in trade and everything else.
I'm contented to be no worse than my neighbours.
But if you want us to come down in the world, say so.
I shall know better what to do then.
"I don't want to quarrel.
And I don't mean to say I shall bear it well.
He said, at last -.
"I will reflect a little, Vincy.
I will mention the subject to Harriet.
I shall probably send you a letter.
As soon as you can, please.
I hope it will all be settled before I see you to-morrow.
who said I had ever promised?
He couldn't speak finer if he wanted to borrow.
"You wished to have the letter, sir.
I never said I believed either one or the other.
And now what d'you expect?
" Fred with difficulty restrained himself from venting his irritation.
"I came to bring you the letter.
If you like I will bid you good morning.
Ring the bell; I want Missy to come.
It was a servant who came in answer to the bell.
"Tell Missy to come!" said Mr Featherstone, impatiently.
"What business had she to go away?
" He spoke in the same tone when Mary came?
"Why couldn't you sit still here till I told you to go?
I told you always to put it on the bed.
Mary's eyes looked rather red, as if she had been crying.
But she never had anything worse than words to dread.
When his own relatives came she was treated better.
"You expect I am going to give you a little fortune, eh?
But then, each might mean fifty pounds.
He took them, saying -.
But this did not suit Mr Featherstone, who was eying him intently.
"Come, don't you think it worth your while to count 'em?
You take money like a lord; I suppose you lose it like one?
"I thought I was not to look a gift-horse in the mouth, sir.
But I shall be very happy to count them.
Fred was not so happy, however, after he had counted them.
Failing this, absurdity and atheism gape behind him?
Nevertheless he said, with rapid changes in his fair complexion -.
"It is very handsome of you, sir.
"So you ought to be.
"Yes, indeed: I was not born to very splendid chances.
"Well, you can buy yourself a fine hunter now.
"Ay, rather a better uncle than your fine uncle Bulstrode.
You won't get much out of his spekilations, I think.
"My father never tells me anything about his affairs, sir.
"Well, he shows some sense there.
But other people find 'em out without his telling.
Fred thought that Mr Featherstone had never been so disagreeable before.
True, he had never before given him quite so much money at once.
"Shall I destroy this letter of Mr Bulstrode's, sir?
"Ay, ay, I don't want it.
It's worth no money to me.
" she said, half rising as Fred entered?
"No; I am only dismissed, because Simmons is gone up.
Mary sat down again, and resumed her work.
"May I stay here a little, Mary, or shall I bore you?
"Poor fellow! I think he is in love with you.
"I am not aware of it.
"Confound John Waule! I did not mean to make you angry.
I didn't know you had any reason for being grateful to me.
"Oh, I am not angry, except with the ways of the world.
I do like to be spoken to as if I had common-sense.
"Oh, I have an easy life - by comparison.
"Rosy!" cried Fred, in a tone of profound brotherly scepticism.
"Come, Fred!" said Mary, emphatically; "you have no right to be so critical.
"Do you mean anything particular - just now?
"No, I mean something general - always.
"Oh, that I am idle and extravagant.
Well, I am not fit to be a poor man.
I should not have made a bad fellow if I had been rich.
You ought to have a little fellow-feeling there, Mary.
"I never said you ought to be a clergyman.
There are other sorts of work.
"If you were sure you should not have a fortune?
"I did not say that.
You want to quarrel with me.
"How can I want to quarrel with you?
"However naughty you may be to other people, you are good to me.
"Because I like you better than any one else.
But I know you despise me.
"Yes, I do - a little," said Mary, nodding, with a smile.
"You would admire a stupendous fellow, who would have wise opinions about everything.
" Mary was sewing swiftly, and seemed provokingly mistress of the situation.
This was what Fred Vincy felt.
It is always some new fellow who strikes a girl.
There is Juliet - she seems an example of what you say.
Altogether, my experience is rather mixed.
Might, could, would - they are contemptible auxiliaries.
"I think the goodness should come before he expects that.
Women don't love men for their goodness.
But if they love them, they never think them bad.
"It is hardly fair to say I am bad.
"I said nothing at all about you.
"I think that is quite wicked, Mary.
If you love me, you ought to promise to marry me.
"You mean, just as I am, without any means of maintaining a wife.
Of course: I am but three-and-twenty.
"In that last point you will alter.
But I am not so sure of any other alteration.
"Then I am to blow my brains out?
I have heard Mr Farebrother say it is disgracefully easy.
"That is all very fine.
Anything is easy to him.
Not that cleverness has anything to do with it.
I am ten times cleverer than many men who pass.
But that only shows you are ten times more idle than the others.
"That is not the question - what I want you to do.
You have a conscience of your own, I suppose.
There! there is Mr Lydgate.
I must go and tell my uncle.
"I will not give you any encouragement," said Mary, reddening.
"Your friends would dislike it, and so would mine.
Fred was stung, and released her hand.
But never speak to me in that way again.
"Very well," said Fred, sulkily, taking up his hat and whip.
His complexion showed patches of pale pink and dead white.
"I don't want to spend that money, mother.
I want it to pay a debt with.
So keep it safe away from my fingers.
"Bless you, my dear," said Mrs Vincy.
And Fred was certainly very fond of his mother.
Nobody's imagination had gone so far as to conjecture that Mr.
Lydgate could know as much as Dr.
Something of that sort happened to Lydgate.
It would at least be a novelty to disturb them.
From that hour Lydgate felt the growth of an intellectual passion.
He cared not only for "cases," but for John and Elizabeth, especially Elizabeth.
Was not this the typical pre-eminence of his profession?
What was the primitive tissue?
Where then lay the spots of commonness?
says a young lady enamoured of that careless grace?
The story can be told without many words.
But this evening the old drama had a new catastrophe.
Paris rang with the story of this death: - was it a murder?
The legal investigation ended in Madame Laure's release.
She talked little; but that was an additional charm.
No matter! It was the one thing which he was resolved to do.
"You have come all the way from Paris to find me?
"Are all Englishmen like that?
"I came because I could not live without trying to see you.
"I know, I know," said Lydgate, deprecatingly.
"There was a secret, then," he said at last, even vehemently.
"He was brutal to you: you hated him.
"Great God!" said Lydgate, in a groan of horror.
"And you planned to murder him?
"You are a good young man," she said.
"But I do not like husbands.
I will never have another.
Middlemarch, in fact, counted on swallowing Lydgate and assimilating him very comfortably.
But, as we have seen, his motives were not always rightly appreciated.
"What line shall you take, then?
" said Mr Chichely, the coroner, a great coursing comrade of Mr Vincy's?
"Oh, I'm precious glad I'm not one of the Directors now.
Lydgate's remark, however, did not meet the sense of the company.
"Hang your reforms!" said Mr Chichely.
"There's no greater humbug in the world.
But Wakley is right sometimes," the Doctor added, judicially.
A lawyer is no better than an old woman at a post-mortem examination.
How is he to know the action of a poison?
" said Mr Chichely, with some scorn?
"Who is often almost as ignorant as the coroner himself," said Lydgate.
I am sure Vincy will agree with me.
"And in my opinion, you're safest with a lawyer.
Most things are 'visitation of God.
Come, shall we join the ladies?
She and Lydgate readily got into conversation.
"You have studied music, probably?
"Yes, and you will find Middlemarch very tuneless.
There are hardly any good musicians.
I only know two gentlemen who sing at all well.
"But we are speaking very ill of our neighbours.
"You will let me hear some music to-night, I hope.
"I will let you hear my attempts, if you like," said Rosamond.
"Papa is sure to insist on my singing.
I have heard very little: I have only once been to London.
"Tell me what you saw in London.
"Do you call yourself a raw country girl?
I am not afraid of talking to our old neighbours.
But I am really afraid of you.
Fred laughed, and went on with his tune to the end.
"Some good rousing tunes first.
It was almost startling, heard for the first time.
Her singing was less remarkable?
Her father looked round at the company, delighting in their admiration.
Ah! you are too young and light for this kind of thing?
Lydgate did not mean to pay many such visits himself.
"We are very stupid, and you have been used to something quite different.
"I suppose all country towns are pretty much alike," said Lydgate.
"No, I mean something much nearer to me.
I am not quite sure whether clever men ever dance?
"I would dance with you if you would allow me.
"Oh!" said Rosamond, with a slight deprecatory laugh.
"Not on the condition I mentioned.
One must use such brains as are to be found?
It is rather harder for a clergyman: Farebrother seems to be an anomaly.
Her favourite poem was "Lalla Rookh.
Pray think no ill of Miss Noble.
One must be poor to know the luxury of giving!.
Mrs Farebrother welcomed the guest with a lively formality and precision.
There was no need to go back on what you couldn't see.
"I object to what is wrong, Camden.
Every respectable Church person had the same opinions.
"But my mother always gives way," said the Vicar, slyly.
Any one may see what comes of turning.
If you change once, why not twenty times?
That's my opinion, and I think anybody's stomach will bear me out.
"About the dinner certainly, mother," said Mr Farebrother.
"It is the same thing, the dinner or the man.
I am nearly seventy, Mr Lydgate, and I go upon experience.
"A mother is never partial," said Mr Farebrother, smiling.
"What do you think Tyke's mother says about him?
"Ah, poor creature! what indeed?
"She says the truth to herself, depend upon it.
"And what is the truth?
"I am curious to know.
"Oh, nothing bad at all," said Mr Farebrother.
But the Vicar answered quietly -.
"That is because they are not my parishioners.
Why was Camden in such haste to take a visitor to his den?
Mr Lydgate must excuse it.
A game at cribbage would be far better.
Lydgate, with the usual shallowness of a young bachelor.
wondered that Mr Farebrother had not taught them better.
"Men of your profession don't generally smoke," he said.
Lydgate smiled and shook his head.
"Nor of mine either, properly, I suppose.
You will hear that pipe alleged against me by Bulstrode and Company.
You are of an excitable temper and want a sedative.
I am heavier, and should get idle with it.
I should rush into idleness, and stagnate there with all my might.
"And you mean to give it all to your work.
I feed a weakness or two lest they should get clamorous.
You don't really care about these things?
"Not by the side of this lovely anencephalous monster.
I have never had time to give myself much to natural history.
I have no hobby besides.
I have the sea to swim in there.
You don't mind my fumigating you?
You remember Trawley who shared your apartment at Paris for some time?
I was very glad when I found that you were.
Lydgate divined some delicacy of feeling here, but did not half understand it.
"By the way," he said, "what has become of Trawley?
I have quite lost sight of him?
He is practising at a German bath, and has married a rich patient.
"He would have it, the medical profession was an inevitable system of humbug.
Do you want to make an exchange?
You shall not have it without a fair barter?
"I have some sea-mice - fine specimens - in spirits.
You must learn to be bored, remember.
However, you shall have the monster on your own terms.
Very few men can do that.
But do look at these delicate orthoptera!".
Some people miss that, and repent too late.
But you must not be too sure of keeping your independence.
"You mean of family ties?
" said Lydgate, conceiving that these might press rather tightly on Mr Farebrother?
Of course they make many things more difficult.
Do you know the Garths?
I think they were not Peacock's patients?
"No; but there is a Miss Garth at old Featherstone's, at Lowick.
"Their daughter: an excellent girl.
"She is very quiet - I have hardly noticed her.
"She has taken notice of you, though, depend upon it.
"I don't understand," said Lydgate; he could hardly say "Of course.
I prepared her for confirmation - she is a favourite of mine.
"But we Middlemarchers are not so tame as you take us to be.
We have our intrigues and our parties.
I am a party man, for example, and Bulstrode is another.
If you vote for me you will offend Bulstrode.
"What is there against Bulstrode?
"I did not say there was anything against him except that.
If you vote against him you will make him your enemy.
He might help me a good deal in carrying out my ideas.
But then you must not offend your arsenic-man.
You will not offend me, you know," said Mr Farebrother, quite unaffectedly.
"I don't translate my own convenience into other people's duties.
I am opposed to Bulstrode in many ways.
And I am not a model clergyman-only a decent makeshift.
Lydgate was not at all sure that the Vicar maligned himself.
He only said, "What reason does Bulstrode give for superseding you?
That is the plain fact of the case.
But let us dismiss it.
Now tell me all about them in Paris.
But his liking for the Vicar of St.
Botolph's grew with growing acquaintanceship.
Lydgate liked him heartily, and wished for his friendship.
Money had never been a motive to him.
Peter's parish, and had time for extra duty.
Really, from his point of view, Bulstrode was thoroughly justified.
But would the end really be his own convenience?
In his student's chambers, he had prearranged his social action quite differently.
Dr Sprague said at once bluntly.
to the group assembled when he entered, "I go for Farebrother.
A salary, with all my heart.
But why take it from the Vicar?
Put forty pounds in his pocket and you'll do no harm.
"He is a real Gospel preacher, is Mr Tyke.
"We have nothing to do with them here.
I call it a confounded job to take the thing away from Farebrother.
"Come, Doctor, I must have you on the right side, eh?
"I confess I have feelings on the other side also.
I have a divided esteem," said Dr Minchin, rubbing his hands.
I, for my part, wish that I could give him my vote.
Old Mr Powderell looked on, sad and silent.
Mr Plymdale settled his cravat, uneasily.
In my opinion Farebrother is too lax for a clergyman.
"Sick people can't bear so much praying and preaching.
These were the Reverend Edward Thesiger, Rector of St.
Lydgate was the only person still expected.
Every one now sat down, Mr Bulstrode presiding, pale and self-restrained as usual.
Mr Brooke believed that everybody meant well in the matter.
"Excuse me, Mr Hawley," said Mr Bulstrode.
"Mr Brooke has been fully informed of Mr Farebrother's character and position.
"By his enemies," flashed out Mr Hawley.
"I trust there is no personal hostility concerned here," said Mr Thesiger.
"I'll swear there is, though," retorted Mr Hawley.
"I don't see the good of that," said Mr Hawley.
"I suppose we all know whom we mean to vote for.
Then, looking up at Lydgate -.
"There is a casting-vote still to be given.
It is yours, Mr Lydgate: will you be good enough to write?
"The thing is settled now," said Mr Wrench, rising.
"We all know how Mr Lydgate will vote.
"I merely mean that you are expected to vote with Mr Bulstrode.
Do you regard that meaning as offensive?
"It may be offensive to others.
But I shall not desist from voting with him on that account.
" Lydgate immediately wrote down "Tyke.
But Mr Farebrother met him with the same friendliness as before.
But the Vicar of St.
Lydgate thought that there was a pitiable infirmity of will in Mr Farebrother.
"What do you think of that for a fine bit of antithesis?
"No, no," said his companion, with a little frown.
He looks more like an uncle - a more useful sort of relation?
"He is not my uncle.
I tell you he is my second cousin," said Ladislaw, with some irritation.
They were not married then.
I didn't know they were coming to Rome.
Shall we go to the post?
And you could speak about the portrait?
"Confound you, Naumann! I don't know what I shall do.
I am not so brazen as you.
"Bah! that is because you are dilettantish and amateurish.
"See now! My existence presupposes the existence of the whole universe-does it not?
- the case is a little less simple then?
"Come now, my friend - you will help?
" said Naumann, in a hopeful tone?
"No; nonsense, Naumann! English ladies are not at everybody's service as models.
And you want to express too much with your painting.
And what is a portrait of a woman?
Your painting and Plastik are poor stuff after all?
They perturb and dull conceptions instead of raising them.
Language is a finer medium.
"Yes, for those who can't paint," said Naumann.
"There you have perfect right.
I did not recommend you to paint, my friend.
He went on as if he had not heard.
"Language gives a fuller image, which is all the better for beings vague.
I feel that especially about representations of women.
But her voice is much diviner than anything you have seen of her?
No man must presume to think that he can paint your ideal.
"How is she to be called then?
Why was he making any fuss about Mrs Casaubon?
Their susceptibilities will clash against objects that remain innocently quiet.
But this stupendous fragmentariness heightened the dreamlike strangeness of her bridal life.
As it is, the quickest of us walk about well wadded with stupidity.
But was not Mr Casaubon just as learned as before?
Had his forms of expression changed, or his sentiments become less laudable?
But the door-sill of marriage once crossed, expectation is concentrated on the present.
When he said, "Does this interest you, Dorothea?
Shall we stay a little longer?
Or, "Should you like to go to the Farnesina, Dorothea?
"But do you care about them?
" was always Dorothea's question?
"They are, I believe, highly esteemed.
Such at least I have gathered to be the opinion of conoscenti.
I fear there was a little temper in her reply.
"Doubtless, my dear," said Mr Casaubon, with a slight bow.
Dorothea was indignant in her turn.
Those were very simple facts, and my judgment went no farther.
I only begged you to let me be of some good to you.
Neither of them felt it possible to speak again at present.
There was clearly something better than anger and despondency.
The courier had told him that only Mrs.
Casaubon was at home, but he said he was a relation of Mr.
Casaubon's: would she see him?
"Yes," said Dorothea, without pause; "show him into the salon.
"I was not aware that you and Mr.
The signs of girlish sorrow in her face were only the more striking.
Casaubon is much engaged; but you will leave your address-will you not?
- and he will write to you?
"My address is on my card.
Casaubon is likely to be at home.
We are about to leave Rome, and he is very busy.
He is usually away almost from breakfast till dinner.
But I am sure he will wish you to dine with us.
Will Ladislaw was struck mute for a few moments.
He had never been fond of Mr.
"Yes," said Will, quick in finding resources.
" said Dorothea, wondering still more?
I always feel particularly ignorant about painting.
At least, you implied that.
" Will could laugh now as well as smile.
"That was really my ignorance," said Dorothea, admiring.
And I have gone about with just the same ignorance in Rome.
There are comparatively few paintings that I can really enjoy.
It must be my own dulness.
That always makes one feel stupid.
(It was impossible now to doubt the directness of Dorothea's confession.
"You mean perhaps to be a painter?
" said Dorothea, with a new direction of interest?
"You mean to make painting your profession?
Casaubon will like to hear that you have chosen a profession.
"No, oh no," said Will, with some coldness.
"I have quite made up my mind against it.
It is too one-sided a life.
"That I can understand," said Dorothea, cordially.
And I should never succeed in anything by dint of drudgery.
If things don't come easily to me I never get them.
Casaubon say that he regrets your want of patience," said Dorothea, gently.
The slight streak of contempt in this hasty reply offended Dorothea.
She was all the more susceptible about Mr.
Casaubon because of her morning's trouble.
"Certainly you differ," she said, rather proudly.
"No, indeed," he answered, promptly.
Casaubon read German he would save himself a great deal of trouble.
"I do not understand you," said Dorothea, startled and anxious.
When I was with Mr.
But now I can be of no use.
The question how she had come to accept Mr.
Whatever else she might be, she was not disagreeable.
She was an angel beguiled.
The AEolian harp again came into his mind.
She must have made some original romance for herself in this marriage.
Casaubon, on the contrary, stood rayless.
Ladislaw understood, and accepting the invitation immediately took his leave.
"Forgive me for speaking so hastily to you this morning.
I fear I hurt you and made the day more burdensome.
"I am glad that you feel that, my dear," said Mr.
He spoke quietly and bowed.
"But you do forgive me?
" said Dorothea, with a quick sob?
Casaubon, exerting himself to make a strong statement, and also to smile faintly.
"You are excited, my dear.
Since things were going on so pleasantly, Mr.
Casaubon should not go away without seeing a studio or two.
Will could not omit Thorwaldsen, a living celebrity about whom even Mr.
Will added that he had made himself Naumann's pupil for the nonce.
"I have been making some oil-sketches under him," said Will.
I must put something of my own in.
But this time I mean to outdo him in breadth of intention.
In my opinion, that is a good mythical interpretation.
" Will here looked at Mr.
"The sketch must be very grand, if it conveys so much," said Dorothea.
"I should need some explanation even of the meaning you give.
Do you intend Tamburlaine to represent earthquakes and volcanoes?
"What a difficult kind of shorthand!" said Dorothea, smiling towards her husband.
"It would require all your knowledge to be able to read it.
Casaubon blinked furtively at Will.
He had a suspicion that he was being laughed at.
But it was not possible to include Dorothea in the suspicion.
Casaubon as much as he did Dorothea.
Casaubon had not interested himself.
"Don't speak of my painting before Naumann," said Will.
"Oh, he does not mean it seriously with painting.
His walk must be belles-lettres.
Naumann's pronunciation of the vowel seemed to stretch the word satirically.
Will did not half like it, but managed to laugh: and Mr.
Casaubon, came forward again and said -.
Thomas Aquinas in my picture there.
"You astonish me greatly, sir," said Mr.
Casaubon will not object to the delay.
Casaubon the wisest and worthiest among the sons of men.
In that case her tottering faith would have become firm again.
The adroit artist was asking Mr.
"Oh, let us stay!" said Dorothea.
"We have nothing to do to-day except go about, have we?
" she added, looking entreatingly at Mr?
"I am at your service, sir, in the matter," said Mr.
Casaubon, bowing, doubted not that Mrs.
The artist was diligent, and Will recovering himself moved about and occupied Mr.
Naumann took the hint and said -.
"Now, sir, if you can oblige me again; I will release the lady-wife.
On the morrow Santa Clara too was retouched more than once.
The result of all was so far from displeasing to Mr.
I will not dwell on Naumann's jokes at the expense of Mr.
She was not a woman to be spoken of as other women were?
Will could not say just what he thought, but he became irritable.
"Oblige me by letting the subject drop, Naumann.
"Schon! I will talk of my Aquinas.
The head is not a bad type, after all.
"He's a cursed white-blooded pedantic coxcomb," said Will, with gnashing impetuosity.
They are spoiling your fine temper.
That was precisely what Will wanted.
But there were plenty of contradictions in his imaginative demands.
Will had not been invited to dine the next day.
Casaubon would not be at home.
"I am so glad you are come.
I wished to have you with us in choosing them, but Mr.
Casaubon objected: he thought there was not time.
I have been uneasy about these cameos.
Pray sit down and look at them.
And the color is fine: it will just suit you.
"Oh, they are for my sister, who has quite a different complexion.
We were never so long away from each other in our lives before.
She is a great pet and never was naughty in her life.
" Dorothea added the last words with a smile.
"No, frankly, I don't think them a great object in life," said Dorothea.
"I fear you are a heretic about art generally.
I should have expected you to be very sensitive to the beautiful everywhere?
"I suppose I am dull about many things," said Dorothea, simply.
"I should like to make life beautiful - I mean everybody's life.
"I call that the fanaticism of sympathy," said Will, impetuously.
"You might say the same of landscape, of poetry, of all refinement.
The best piety is to enjoy - when you can.
" Will had gone further than he intended, and checked himself.
I am not a sad, melancholy creature.
I am never unhappy long together.
I cannot help believing in glorious things in a blind sort of way.
"You talk as if you had never known any youth.
"It is very good of you to be anxious about me.
But Lowick is my chosen home.
"I wanted to ask you again about something you said the other day.
"I have a hyperbolical tongue: it catches fire as it goes.
I dare say I shall have to retract.
"He is not an Orientalist, you know.
He does not profess to have more than second-hand knowledge there.
Casaubon's not be valuable, like theirs?
" said Dorothea, with more remonstrant energy?
"How can you bear to speak so lightly?
" said Dorothea, with a look between sorrow and anger?
"You questioned me about the matter of fact, not of feeling," said Will.
"But if you wish to punish me for the fact, I submit.
I am not in a position to express my feeling toward Mr.
Casaubon: it would be at best a pensioner's eulogy.
"Pray excuse me," said Dorothea, coloring deeply.
Indeed, I am wrong altogether.
"That is fine - I respect that feeling," said Dorothea, with returning kindness.
Aloud he said, rising -.
"I shall not see you again.
Casaubon comes," said Dorothea, earnestly.
"I am so glad we met in Rome.
I wanted to know you.
"And I have made you angry," said Will.
"I have made you think ill of me.
But I hope I am not given to think ill of them.
In the end I am usually obliged to think ill of myself.
"Not at all," said Dorothea, with the most open kindness.
"I like you very much.
He said nothing, but looked dull, not to say sulky.
"I believe devoutly in a natural difference of vocation.
One may have that condition by fits only.
"But you leave out the poems," said Dorothea.
"I think they are wanted to complete the poet.
But I am sure I could never produce a poem.
"What very kind things you say to me!".
" Will spoke with fervor.
"Oh yes," said Dorothea, cordially.
"It will come; and I shall remember how well you wish me.
Casaubon's writings - I mean in that kind of way.
It was I who led to it.
"Certainly, I will promise you," said Will, reddening however.
If he never said a cutting word about Mr.
He said that he must go now without waiting for Mr.
Casaubon, whom he would come to take leave of at the last moment.
Dorothea gave him her hand, and they exchanged a simple "Good-by.
But going out of the porte cochere he met Mr.
"I have something to tell you about our cousin Mr.
"What is that, my love?
He means soon to go back to England, and work his own way.
Of course he will write to you about it.
Do you not think better of him for his resolve?
"I shall await his communication on the subject," said Mr.
"I had a duty towards him," said Mr.
" Dorothea did not mention Will again.
Fred Vincy, we have seen.
The total debt was a hundred and sixty pounds.
The easier course plainly, was to renew the bill with a friend's signature.
Featherstone's double marriage (the first to Mr.
Garth's sister, and the second to Mrs.
Vincy had never been at her ease with Mrs.
And since Mary had been keeping Mr.
" Such was Caleb's psychological argument.
I fear he was a bad disciplinarian.
"It was a misfortune, eh, that breaking the horse's knees?
You'll be wiser another time, my boy.
Garth remained ignorant of the affair.
Garth, by his love for Mary and awe of her opinion.
Before he set out, Fred got the eighty pounds from his mother.
Horrock there was certainly an apparent unfathomableness which offered play to the imagination.
The part thus played in dialogue by Mr.
But a slight infusion of Mr.
Bambridge was a man of pleasure and a gay companion.
Bambridge's weakness to be a gratuitous flatterer.
If you set him cantering, he goes on like twenty sawyers.
' That was what I said.
It went the round of the country, that joke did.
"I said a lie, then," said Mr.
"There wasn't a penny to choose between 'em.
Fred spurred his horse, and they trotted on a little way.
When they slackened again, Mr.
"Not but what the roan was a better trotter than yours.
A young farmer, acquainted with Mr.
Garth would at the utmost be twenty-five pounds.
With regard to horses, distrust was your only clew.
Even if he had applied to his father on the plea that Mr.
Garth from the consequence of what he would call encouraging extravagance and deceit.
Garth, he would ride to Stone Court and confess all to Mary.
Garth, of whom he was rather more in awe than of her husband.
In her present matronly age at least, Mrs.
Also, it must be admitted that Mrs.
"Now let us go through that once more," said Mrs.
What's the use of it?
"Should you like to speak as old Job does?
"Yes," said Ben, stoutly; "it's funnier.
He says, `Yo goo'-that's just as good as `You go.
"You might think he meant a ship off the sea.
"No, you mightn't, if you weren't silly," said Ben.
"How could a ship off the sea come there?
Job has only to speak about very plain things.
What would you do then?
"I see you are getting tired and stupid, Ben," said Mrs.
Garth, accustomed to these obstructive arguments from her male offspring.
"I know! he was a farmer," said Ben.
"You silly thing, he was a Roman farmer, and he was ploughing.
And he was a brave man, and could fight.
And so could my father - couldn't he, mother?
"Please, mother, tell Ben not to speak.
"Very well, dictator!" said Ben, contemptuously.
"Come, come, Ben, you are not so ignorant as that," said Mrs.
"Hark, there is a knock at the door! Run, Letty, and open it.
He could not depart from his usual practice of going to see Mrs.
Garth in the kitchen if she happened to be at work there.
"You, Fred, so early in the day?
"I want to speak to Mr.
"Caleb will be in again in a few minutes," said Mrs.
Garth, who imagined some trouble between Fred and his father.
Do you mind staying with me, while I finish my matters here?
"But we needn't go on about Cincinnatus, need we?
But put that whip down.
"Come, old boy, give it me," said Fred, putting out his hand.
"Will you let me ride on your horse to-day?
"Not to-day - another time.
I am not riding my own horse.
"Shall you see Mary to-day?
"Yes, I think so," said Fred, with an unpleasant twinge.
"Tell her to come home soon, and play at forfeits, and make fun.
"Enough, enough, Ben! run away," said Mrs.
Garth, seeing that Fred was teased.
"Are Letty and Ben your only pupils now, Mrs.
He was not yet sure whether he should wait for Mr.
Garth, or use any good opportunity in conversation to confess to Mrs.
Garth herself, give her the money and ride away.
Fanny Hackbutt comes at half past eleven.
I am not getting a great income now," said Mrs.
"I am at a low ebb with pupils.
He can go to Mr.
Hanmer's now; he is just at the right age.
This did not lead well towards the news that Mr.
Garth was on the brink of losing ninety-two pounds and more.
"Young gentlemen who go to college are rather more costly than that," Mrs.
Garth innocently continued, pulling out the edging on a cap-border.
There he is! I hear him coming in.
We will go to him in the parlor, shall we?
I am come to tell you and Mrs.
Garth that I can't keep my word.
I can't find the money to meet the bill after all.
Garth was mutely astonished, and looked at her husband for an explanation.
Caleb blushed, and after a little pause said -.
He made sure he could meet it himself.
There was an evident change in Mrs.
She fixed her eyes on Fred, saying -.
Garth's name in the matter.
What can we do, Susan?
I shall want every farthing we have in the bank?
It's a hundred and ten pounds, the deuce take it!".
"I shall certainly pay it all, Mrs.
Garth - ultimately," he stammered out.
"But boys cannot well be apprenticed ultimately: they should be apprenticed at fifteen.
" She had never been so little inclined to make excuses for Fred.
"I was the most in the wrong, Susan," said Caleb.
"Fred made sure of finding the money.
But I'd no business to be fingering bills.
I suppose you have looked all round and tried all honest means?
" he added, fixing his merciful gray eyes on Fred?
Caleb was too delicate, to specify Mr.
"Yes, I have tried everything - I really have.
There's no one else I care so much for: you and Mrs.
Garth have always been so kind to me.
However, it's no use saying that.
You will always think me a rascal now.
They could see him mount, and quickly pass through the gate.
"I am disappointed in Fred Vincy," said Mrs.
"I was a fool, Susan:".
"That you were," said the wife, nodding and smiling.
"But I should not have gone to publish it in the market-place.
Why should you keep such things from me?
"I can't abide your losing the money you've scraped together for Alfred.
You must give up your bad habits.
Some men take to drinking, and you have taken to working without pay.
You must indulge yourself a little less in that.
It had laid hold of his imagination in boyhood.
He divided them into "business, politics, preaching, learning, and amusement.
In fact, he had a reverential soul with a strong practical intelligence.
" However, they did not mind it.
Mary was in her usual corner, laughing over Mrs.
She too was silent, only raising her eyes to him inquiringly.
"Mary," he began, "I am a good-for-nothing blackguard.
"I know you will never think well of me any more.
You will think me a liar.
You will think me dishonest.
You will think I didn't care for you, or your father and mother.
You always do make the worst of me, I know.
But please to tell me at once what you have done.
I would rather know the painful truth than imagine it.
"I owed money - a hundred and sixty pounds.
I asked your father to put his name to a bill.
I thought it would not signify to him.
And my uncle gave me a hundred a little while ago.
So what can I do?
You see what a - ".
He too remained silent for some moments, feeling more miserable than ever.
"I wouldn't have hurt you for the world, Mary," he said at last.
"You can never forgive me.
"What does it matter whether I forgive you?
Should you think all that pleasant enough if I forgave you?
"Say what you like, Mary.
But no! Mary could easily avoid looking upward.
"I wanted to ask you, Mary-don't you think that Mr.
"My family is not fond of begging, Fred.
We would rather work for our money.
Besides, you say that Mr.
Featherstone has lately given you a hundred pounds.
He rarely makes presents; he has never made presents to us.
"There are other things to be more sorry for than that.
I see enough of that every day.
"It is hardly fair to call me selfish.
"How dare you make any comparison between my father and you, Fred?
" said Mary, in a deep tone of indignation?
And he has fared hard, and worked hard to make good everybody's loss.
"And you think that I shall never try to make good anything, Mary.
It is not generous to believe the worst of a man.
However, I'm going," Fred ended, languidly.
"I shall never speak to you about anything again.
I'm very sorry for all the trouble I've caused - that's all.
Mary had dropped her work out of her hand and looked up.
"Oh, Fred, how ill you look! Sit down a moment.
Let me tell uncle that you are here.
"Say one word, Mary, and I will do anything.
What will you be when you are forty?
Bowyer, I suppose-just as idle, living in Mrs.
You MUST see him for a moment or two.
Featherstone, and she always ignored them, as if everything depended on himself.
After discussing prices during tea with Mr.
"No very good news; but then it might be worse.
I think I know what it is?
"Oh yes; I have more than four-and-twenty pounds.
I thought you would come, father, so I put it in my bag.
See! beautiful white notes and gold.
"Fred told me this morning.
"Ah! Did he come on purpose?
He was a good deal distressed.
"He means better than he acts, perhaps.
"I don't want to pry, my dear.
"Well, well, nobody's perfect, but" - here Mr.
That's the long and the short of it, Mary.
You and my mother have taught me too much pride for that.
"That's right - that's right.
Then I am easy," said Mr.
Garth, taking up his {hat or bet.
} But it's hard to run away with your earnings, eh child?
"Father!" said Mary, in her deepest tone of remonstrance.
"I suppose your father wanted your earnings," said old Mr.
Featherstone, with his usual power of unpleasant surmise, when Mary returned to him.
"He makes but a tight fit, I reckon.
You're of age now; you ought to be saving for yourself.
Great statesmen err, and why not small medical men?
Wrench was again sent for, but was gone on his rounds, and Mrs.
I must have taken cold in that nasty damp ride.
Lydgate, stopping to speak to some one.
If I were you I would call him in.
He has cured Ellen Bulstrode.
They say he cures every one.
Lydgate had to hear a narrative in which Mrs.
Wrench had said and had not said about coming again.
She thought it "very ill usage on the part of Mr.
Wrench, who had attended their house so many years in preference to Mr.
Peacock was equally a friend.
He had not neglected Mrs.
Larcher's when they had the measles, nor indeed would Mrs.
Vincy have wished that he should.
And if anything should happen - ".
Wrench and tell him what had been done.
"But you must come again - you must go on attending Fred.
I can't have my boy left to anybody who may come or not.
I bear nobody ill-will, thank God, and Mr.
Wrench here, then, shall I?
"Pray make that arrangement, Mr.
Lydgate should go on now, whether Wrench liked it or not.
It was no joke to have fever in the house.
Everybody must be sent to now, not to come to dinner on Thursday.
"I shall drink brandy," added Mr.
"He's an uncommonly unfortunate lad, is Fred.
"It will worret you to death, Lucy; THAT I can see," said Mr.
"However, Wrench shall know what I think of the matter.
But Wrench shall know what I think, take it as he will.
Wrench did not take it at all well.
Wrench was one of the most irritable among them.
He had to hear Mrs.
Wrench, what have I ever done that you should use me so?
-"To let fever get unawares into a house like this.
Wrench afterwards said, Lydgate paraded flighty, foreign notions, which would not wear.
The house might be a good one, but Mr.
Wrench was not going to truckle to anybody on a professional matter.
That cant about cures was never got up by sound practitioners.
Wrench could wish, by an unprofessional openness.
Some said, that the Vincys had behaved scandalously, that Mr.
Vincy had threatened Wrench, and that Mrs.
Vincy had accused him of poisoning her son.
Others were of opinion that Mr.
She one day communicated this piece of knowledge to Mrs.
Farebrother, who did not fail to tell her son of it, observing -.
He never heard of Bulstrode before he came here.
"That is satisfactory so far as Mr.
Lydgate is concerned, Camden," said the old lady, with an air of precision.
- "But as to Bulstrode-the report may be true of some other son.
These things are a parable.
Wrench's mistake in order to bring her and Lydgate within effective proximity.
Lydgate thought the precaution needless.
After her first outburst against-Mr.
Wrench she went about very quietly: her one low cry was to Lydgate.
" Once she pleaded, "He has always been good to me, Mr.
"I have good hope, Mrs.
"Come down with me and let us talk about the food.
There was a constant understanding between him and Rosamond on these matters.
In the more doubtful time, he had advised calling in Dr.
Morning and evening he was at Mr.
The old man himself was getting bedridden.
"Not if they won't have me, mother," said Fred.
The illness had made him childish, and tears came as he spoke.
"Oh, take a bit of jelly, my dear," said Mrs.
Vincy, secretly incredulous of any such refusal.
Flirtation, after all, was not necessarily a singeing process.
How different he was from young Plymdale or Mr.
Nature had inspired many arts in finishing Mrs.
Really, the men in Middlemarch, except Mr?
The card-table had drawn off the elders, and Mr.
Rosamond was gracious, and Mr.
"I think the Honorable Mrs.
is something like you," said Mr.
She went on with her tatting all the while.
"I did not say she was as beautiful as you are," said Mr.
Ned, venturing to look from the portrait to its rival.
"What a late comer you are!" she said, as they shook hands.
"Mamma had given you up a little while ago.
How do you find Fred?
"As usual; going on well, but slowly.
I want him to go away-to Stone Court, for example.
But your mamma seems to have some objection.
"Poor fellow!" said Rosamond, prettily.
Lydgate as our guardian angel during this illness.
"What are you laughing at so profanely?
" said Rosamond, with bland neutrality?
Did any haberdasher ever look so smirking?
"This is the first time I have heard it called silly.
"I suspect you know nothing about Lady Blessington and L.
"But Sir Walter Scott - I suppose Mr.
Lydgate knows him," said young Plymdale, a little cheered by this advantage.
I used to know Scott's poems by heart.
Lydgate would say that was not worth knowing," said Mr.
"How rash you are!" said Rosamond, inwardly delighted.
"Do you see that you have given offence?
I didn't think about it.
"Well, there is a bird who can teach me what she will.
Don't I listen to her willingly?
The servant was Sir James Chettam's, and the house was Lowick Manor.
The distant flat shrank in uniform whiteness and low-hanging uniformity of cloud.
Never perhaps, as she had preconceived them; but somehow-still somehow?
Casaubon's aunt Julia, who had made the unfortunate marriage-of Will Ladislaw's grandmother.
Was it only her friends who thought her marriage unfortunate?
Here was a woman who had known some difficulty about marriage.
"Oh, it was cruel to speak so! How sad - how dreadful!".
Tucker was gone and Mr.
Casaubon was alone in the library.
Brooke, exchanging welcomes and congratulations with Mr.
"I need not ask how you are, my dear," said Mr.
Brooke, after kissing her forehead.
Studying hard in his holidays is carrying it rather too far.
I overdid it at one time" - Mr.
Brooke still held Dorothea's hand, but had turned his face to Mr.
"Nothing to alarm you, my dear," said Mr.
"A little English beef and mutton will soon make a difference.
But Aquinas, now - he was a little too subtle, wasn't he?
"He is not indeed an author adapted to superficial minds," said Mr.
Casaubon, meeting these timely questions with dignified patience.
"You would like coffee in your own room, uncle?
" said Dorothea, coming to the rescue?
I leave it all to her.
"Do you think it nice to go to Rome on a wedding journey?
And Lady Chettam says she went to Bath.
" Celia's color changed again and again - seemed.
It must mean more than Celia's blushing usually did.
" said Dorothea, in a tone full of sisterly feeling?
"Have you really any great news to tell me?
"It was because you went away, Dodo.
Celia's marriage seemed more serious than it used to do.
"It was only three days ago," said Celia.
"And Lady Chettam is very kind.
"And you are very happy?
We are not going to be married yet.
Because every thing is to be got ready.
And we shall be married all our lives after.
"I do believe you could not marry better, Kitty.
Sir James is a good, honorable man," said Dorothea, warmly.
"He has gone on with the cottages, Dodo.
He will tell you about them when he comes.
Shall you be glad to see him?
How can you ask me?
One morning, some weeks after her arrival at Lowick, Dorothea-but why always Dorothea?
Times had altered since then, and no sonneteer had insisted on Mr.
Casaubon had never yet employed and had a suspicious dread of.
Casaubon was nervously conscious that he was expected to manifest a powerful mind.
) Providence, in its kindness, had supplied him with the wife he needed.
Casaubon was an idea which could hardly occur to him.
Casaubon believed that his happiness was going to begin.
He had not had much foretaste of happiness in his previous life.
Casaubon's desk, and also in a dark closet of his verbal memory.
For my part I am very sorry for him.
Inclination yearned back to its old, easier custom.
The work had been easier to define because Mr.
These minor monumental productions were always exciting to Mr.
Ladislaw! What can he have to say to me?
" she exclaimed, in a tone of pleased surprise?
"But," she added, looking at Mr.
Casaubon, "I can imagine what he has written to you about.
"You can, if you please, read the letter," said Mr.
Casaubon, severely pointing to it with his pen, and not looking at her.
Casaubon seemed to be stupidly undiscerning and odiously unjust.
Casaubon into looking at her, and meeting the flash of her eyes.
"Dorothea, you are hasty," answered Mr.
"We will, if you please, say no more on this subject, Dorothea.
I have neither leisure nor energy for this kind of debate.
"Can you lean on me, dear?
Dorothea rang the bell violently, and presently Mr.
Casaubon had "had a fit in the library.
He asked his informant, the butler, whether the doctor had been sent for.
When Sir James entered the library, however, Mr.
"I recommend you to send for Lydgate," said Sir James.
"My mother has called him in, and she has found him uncommonly clever.
She has had a poor opinion of the physicians since my father's death.
Dorothea appealed to her husband, and he made a silent sign of approval.
"It is very shocking that Mr.
Casaubon should be ill; but I never did like him.
"I always thought it a horrible sacrifice of your sister," said Sir James.
"She is a noble creature," said the loyal-hearted Sir James.
He did not know how much penitence there was in the sorrow.
"Shall I go to her?
Could I help her, do you think?
He could remain her brotherly friend, interpreting her actions with generous trustfulness.
But Lydgate seemed to think the case worth a great deal of attention.
Brooke, who sat by on one occasion, suggested that Mr.
"I confess," said Lydgate, smiling, "amusement is rather an unsatisfactory prescription.
It is something like telling people to keep up their spirits.
"Get Dorothea to play back.
gammon with you in the evenings.
I remember it all the fashion.
To be sure, your eyes might not stand that, Casaubon.
But you must unbend, you know.
We have no such humor now.
"As new as eating thistles," would have been an answer to represent Mr.
I would never give way to that; I was always versatile.
But a clergyman is tied a little tight.
But I recommend you to talk to Mrs.
She is clever enough for anything, is my niece.
Tell her, her husband wants liveliness, diversion: put her on amusing tactics.
Brooke's advice, Lydgate had determined on speaking to Dorothea.
"Since you forbade books, the library has been out of the question.
Casaubon will soon be here again, I hope.
Is he not making progress?
"Yes, much more rapid progress than I at first expected.
Indeed, he is already nearly in his usual state of health.
"You do not fear that the illness will return?
" said Dorothea, whose quick ear had detected some significance in Lydgate's tone?
"Such cases are peculiarly difficult to pronounce upon," said Lydgate.
Casaubon's account, lest he should in any way strain his nervous power.
"I beseech you to speak quite plainly," said Dorothea, in an imploring tone.
"What you say now justifies my own view," said Lydgate.
But I beg you to observe that Mr.
"Yes - careful against mental agitation of all kinds, and against excessive application.
"I am aware of that.
Nothing should be neglected which might be affected by such an issue.
"Tell me what I can do.
"What do you think of foreign travel?
You have been lately in Rome, I think?
"Nothing will be of any use that he does not enjoy.
Women just like Dorothea had not entered into his traditions.
"It was right of you to tell me.
I thank you for telling me the truth.
Anxiety of any kind would be precisely the most unfavorable condition for him.
Lydgate rose, and Dorothea mechanically rose at the same time?
unclasping her cloak and throwing it off as if it stifled her?
"Oh, you are a wise man, are you not?
You know all about life and death?
Think what I can do.
He has been laboring all his life and looking forward.
He minds about nothing else.
-And I mind about nothing else - ".
But what could he say now except that he should see Mr.
When he was gone, Dorothea's tears gushed forth, and relieved her stifling oppression.
Casaubon might now at any moment wish to enter.
Will wrote from Rome, and began by saying that his obligations to Mr.
Casaubon were too deep for all thanks not to seem impertinent.
To expand in wordy thanks would be like saying, "I am honest.
Casaubon, with whose permission, and Mrs.
Casaubon's, Will would convey it to Lowick in person.
He enclosed a letter to Mrs.
No one more ready than Mr.
He had simply said to Dorothea -.
"To be sure, I will write, my dear.
It's a good letter - marks his sense of things, you know.
However, I will tell him about Casaubon.
But the end of Mr.
It expressed regrets and proposed remedies, which, when Mr.
just at that time, in order that Mr.
Lydgate that evening spoke to Miss Vincy of Mrs.
"Do you think her very handsome?
"She certainly is handsome, but I have not thought about it," said Lydgate.
"I suppose it would be unprofessional," said Rosamond, dimpling.
"Yes," said Lydgate, in a tone of compulsory admission.
"But I don't really like attending such people so well as the poor.
"Not more than in Middlemarch," said Rosamond.
Bulstrode had a long-standing intimacy with Mrs.
Bulstrode, paying a morning visit to Mrs.
"Why do you say 'poor Rosamond'?
Plymdale, a round-eyed sharp little woman, like a tamed falcon.
"She is so pretty, and has been brought up in such thoughtlessness.
"Well, Harriet, if I am to speak my mind," said Mrs.
Plymdale, with emphasis, "I must say, anybody would suppose you and Mr.
"Selina, what do you mean?
"Not but what I am truly thankful for Ned's sake," said Mrs.
"I don't know, Selina," said Mrs.
Bulstrode, with a little emphasis in her turn.
Bulstrode was a stranger here at one time.
And especially," she added, after a slight pause, "when they are unexceptionable.
"I was not speaking in a religious sense, Harriet.
I spoke as a mother.
That is not a Christian spirit, I think.
"You don't mean that there is anything between Rosamond and Mr.
Bulstrode, rather mortified at finding out her own ignorance.
"Is it possible you don't know, Harriet?
You see so many people that I don't see.
Your circle is rather different from ours.
"Well, but your own niece and Mr.
"I don't believe there can be anything serious at present," said Mrs.
"My brother would certainly have told me.
Lydgate together without taking them to be engaged.
However, it is not my business.
Shall I put up the pattern of mittens?
Bulstrode drove to her niece with a mind newly weighted.
She had a good honest glance and used no circumlocution.
" Rosamond's eyes also were roaming over her aunt's large embroidered collar?
Bulstrode's eyes finally rested on Rosamond's, who blushed deeply, and said -.
"I am not engaged, aunt.
"Oh, my dear, be more thoughtful; don't despise your neighbors so.
But the profession is a poor one here.
And you are not fit to marry a poor man.
Lydgate is not a poor man, aunt.
He has very high connections.
"He told me himself he was poor.
"That is because he is used to people who have a high style.
"My dear Rosamond, YOU must not think of living in high style.
Rosamond looked down and played with her reticule.
"Then it is really true?
Bulstrode, looking very earnestly at her niece.
"You are thinking of Mr.
Lydgate - there is some understanding between you, though your father doesn't know.
Be open, my dear Rosamond: Mr.
Lydgate has really made you an offer?
Poor Rosamond's feelings were very unpleasant.
Her pride was hurt, but her habitual control of manner helped her.
I would rather not speak on the subject.
But a girl should keep her heart within her own power.
"I should never give it to Mr.
Ned Plymdale, if it were.
I have already refused him.
"I see how it is, my dear," said Mrs.
Bulstrode, in a melancholy voice, rising to go.
"You have allowed your affections to be engaged without return.
"No, indeed, aunt," said Rosamond, with emphasis.
"Then you are quite confident that Mr.
Lydgate has a serious attachment to you?
Rosamond's cheeks by this time were persistently burning, and she felt much mortification.
Lydgate whether he had any intention of marrying soon.
The result was a decided negative.
I think it is a heavy responsibility, Mr.
Lydgate, to interfere with the prospects of any girl.
Lydgate, you know well what your advantages are.
You know that our young men here cannot cope with you.
Bulstrode, having no doubt that she had been understood, turned the conversation.
However, the mistake should go no farther.
Vincy was not at home, and leaving the message with Miss Vincy.
In all failures, the beginning is certainly the half of the whole.
Lydgate instantaneously stooped to pick up the chain.
That moment of naturalness was the crystallizing feather-touch: it shook flirtation into love.
Rosamond had never been spoken to in such tones before.
He came again in the evening to speak with Mr.
Vincy hated both solemnity and affectation.
The triumphant confidence of the Mayor founded on Mr.
Vincy on the point of extra down-stairs consumption now that Mr.
Have some stuffed veal always, and a fine cheese in cut.
Vincy, once more of cheerful note and bright plumage.
When Mary Garth entered the kitchen and Mr.
He fled by another doorway, but Mr.
Too languid to sting, he had the more venom refluent in his blood.
Waule began - but Solomon put his hand before her repressingly.
The Almighty knows what I've got on my mind - ".
"But you can't take your own time to die in, Brother," began Mrs.
Waule, with her usual woolly tone.
"No, I shan't," said old Featherstone, contradictiously.
"I shan't think of any of you.
I've made my will, I tell you, I've made my will.
" Here he turned his head towards Mrs.
Vincy, and swallowed some more of his cordial.
Waule, turning her narrow eyes in the same direction.
Fred's spirit could not bear this: rising and looking at Mr.
"Sit down, I tell you," said old Featherstone, snappishly.
"I shall be down-stairs, Brother, whether or no," said Solomon.
"Yes, in property going out of families," said Mrs.
Waule, in continuation, - "and where there's steady young men to carry on.
But I pity them who are not such, and I pity their mothers.
"But I bid you good-by for the present.
Their exit was hastened by their seeing old Mr.
Hence she had her share of compliments and polite attentions.
There was no odious cupidity in Mr.
If anybody had observed that Mr.
"Thank you," said Mary, "I have an errand.
Trumbull, you're highly favored," said Mrs.
"What! seeing the old man?
" said the auctioneer, playing with his seals dispassionately?
"Ah, you see he has relied on me considerably.
" Here he pressed his lips together, and frowned meditatively.
"Might anybody ask what their brother has been saying?
"Oh yes, anybody may ask," said Mr.
Trumbull, with loud and good-humored though cutting sarcasm.
"This is constantly done by good speakers, even when they anticipate no answer.
" The eloquent auctioneer smiled at his own ingenuity.
"I shouldn't be sorry to hear he'd remembered you, Mr.
"I never was against the deserving.
It's the undeserving I'm against.
"Ah, there it is, you see, there it is," said Mr.
It is so, with testamentary dispositions.
" Again he pursed up his lips and frowned a little.
"Do you mean to say for certain, Mr.
Trumbull, that my brother has left his land away from our family?
Trumbull, you never can mean to say that.
It would be flying in the face of the Almighty that's prospered him.
Waule's question had gone by safely, while she and Solomon, watching Mr.
Trumbull's movements, were thinking that high learning interfered sadly with serious affairs.
"As a man with public business, I take a snack when I can.
"Some don't like so much sugar in their hams," said Mrs.
"But my poor brother would always have sugar.
There is some gratification to a gentleman"-here Mr.
"It is by the author of `Waverley': that is Sir Walter Scott.
" (Things never began with Mr.
) "You are a reader, I see.
Do you subscribe to our Middlemarch library?
Fred Vincy brought this book.
"I am a great bookman myself," returned Mr.
Also pictures by Murillo, Rubens, Teniers, Titian, Vandyck, and others.
"His first wife was a poor match for him, though," said Mrs.
And my brother has always paid her wage.
"A sensible girl though, in my opinion," said Mr.
"I have observed her when she has been mixing medicine in drops.
She minds what she is doing, sir.
I wish you good morning, Mrs.
I trust we shall meet under less melancholy auspices.
"Anybody would think so, from the way Mr.
"Auctioneers talk wild," said Solomon.
"Not but what Trumbull has made money.
That night after twelve o'clock Mary Garth relieved the watch in Mr.
Featherstone's room, and sat there alone through the small hours.
She had a good deal of disdain for Mrs.
Mary had plenty of merriment within.
She had always seen the most disagreeable side of Mr.
he was not proud of her, and she was only useful to him.
About three o'clock he said, with remarkable distinctness, "Missy, come here!".
He nodded slightly and she went on.
Jonah Featherstone and young Cranch are sleeping here.
"Oh ay, they stick, do they?
They come peeping, and counting and casting up?
"Not all of them every day.
Waule are here every day, and the others come often.
I know all my property, and where the money's put out, and everything.
He now lowered his tone with an air of deeper cunning.
"I've made two wills, and I'm going to burn one.
Now you do as I tell you.
This is the key of my iron chest, in the closet there.
"No, sir," said Mary, in a firm voice, "I cannot do that.
"I cannot touch your iron chest or your will.
I must refuse to do anything that might lay me open to suspicion.
"I tell you, I'm in my right mind.
Shan't I do as I like at the last?
I made two wills on purpose?
Take the key, I say.
"No, sir, I will not," said Mary, more resolutely still.
Her repulsion was getting stronger.
"I tell you, there's no time to lose.
"I cannot help that, sir.
I will not touch your iron chest or your will.
" She moved to a little distance from the bedside.
"I will not touch your key or your money, sir.
Pray don't ask me to do it again.
If you do, I must go and call your brother.
Presently he rallied and said eagerly -.
Mary's heart began to beat more quickly.
She had to make a difficult decision in a hurry.
"I will call him, if you will let me call Mr.
Jonah and others with him.
I shall do as I like.
"Wait till broad daylight, sir, when every one is stirring.
Or let me call Simmons now, to go and fetch the lawyer?
He can be here in less than two hours?
What do I want with the lawyer?
Nobody shall know - I say, nobody shall know?
I shall do as I like.
"Let me call some one else, sir," said Mary, persuasively.
"Let me, pray, call some one else.
"You let me alone, I say.
You'll never have the chance again.
Take it and do as I tell you.
"It is of no use, sir.
I will not do it.
I will not touch your money.
You come here - you come here.
Mary approached him cautiously, knowing him too well.
She paused at a safe distance.
You will perhaps go to sleep.
And to-morrow by daylight you can do as you like.
It fell, slipping over the foot of the bed.
Mary let it lie, and retreated to her chair by the fire.
By-and-by she would go to him with the cordial.
Fatigue would make him passive.
Featherstone might now fall asleep.
If she went near him the irritation might be kept up.
The next moment she ran to the bell and rang it energetically.
It was on a morning of May that Peter Featherstone was buried.
Thus old Featherstone was imaginative, after his fashion.
The clergyman who met the procession was Mr.
But his relations with Mr.
Cadwallader had been of a different kind: the trout-stream which ran through Mr.
Casaubon's land took its course through Featherstone's also, so that Mr.
There would be a satisfaction in being buried by Mr.
"I will go anywhere with you, Mrs.
Cadwallader," Celia had said; "but I don't like funerals.
"No, to be sure not," said the Dowager Lady Chettam, with stately emphasis.
Peter's at Rome was inwoven with moods of despondency.
I am quite obliged to Mrs.
Cadwallader for coming and calling me out of the library.
"Quite right to feel obliged to me," said Mrs.
"Ah," turning round at the sound of the opening door, "here is Mr.
I felt that we were incomplete before, and here is the explanation.
You are come to see this odd funeral, of course?
Brooke, nodding at Dorothea as she came towards him.
"I looked into the library, and I saw Casaubon over his books.
' And he promised me to come up.
I didn't tell him my news: I said, he must come up.
"Ah, now they are coming out of church," Mrs.
"Dear me, what a wonderfully mixed set! Mr.
Lydgate as doctor, I suppose.
Who are they, Sir James, do you know?
Brooke, who nodded and said -.
You have seen him at my house, you know.
"Ah, yes: one of your secret committee," said Mrs.
"A coursing fellow, though," said Sir James, with a fox-hunter's disgust.
That is how his family look so fair and sleek," said Mrs.
"Those dark, purple-faced people are an excellent foil.
"It's a solemn thing, though, a funeral," said Mr.
Brooke, "if you take it in that light, you know.
"But I am not taking it in that light.
I can't wear my solemnity too often, else it will go to rags.
"This funeral seems to me the most dismal thing I ever saw.
He must be of another blood, I think.
"Let me see!" said Celia, with awakened curiosity, standing behind Mrs.
Cadwallader and leaning forward over her head.
"And we have brought the picture at the top of the carriage.
I knew you would be pleased with the surprise, Casaubon.
There you are to the very life - as Aquinas, you know.
Quite the right sort of thing.
And you will hear young Ladislaw talk about it.
"A young relative of Mr.
Casaubon's," said Sir James, promptly.
"He repays your expense in him, Casaubon," he went on, nodding encouragingly.
The funeral was ended now, and the churchyard was being cleared.
"Now you can see him, Mrs.
"He is just like a miniature of Mr.
Casaubon's aunt that hangs in Dorothea's boudoir-quite nice-looking.
"A very pretty sprig," said Mrs.
"What is your nephew to be, Mr.
"Pardon me, he is not my nephew.
"Well, you know," interposed Mr.
Brooke, "he is trying his wings.
He is just the sort of young fellow to rise.
I should be glad to give him an opportunity.
"One who can write speeches.
"I'll fetch him in now, eh, Casaubon?
"He wouldn't come in till I had announced him, you know.
And we'll go down and look at the picture.
But you are at home in that, Casaubon.
And your painter's flesh is good - solidity, transparency, everything of that sort.
I went into that a great deal at one time.
However, I'll go and fetch Ladislaw.
This second cousin was a Middlemarch mercer of polite manners and superfluous aspirates.
The wit of a family is usually best received among strangers.
This was the stranger described by Mrs.
Featherstone was down-stairs, and had sat alone with him for several hours.
Waule, seeing two vacant seats between herself and Mr.
"I suppose you know everything about what my poor brother's done, Mr.
"Them who've made sure of their good-luck may be disappointed yet," Mrs.
Waule continued, finding some relief in this communication.
"Hopes are often delusive," said Mr.
"It's wonderful how close poor Peter was," she said, in the same undertones.
"We none of us know what he might have had on his mind.
And stock always short, and land most awkward.
Vincy had glanced at the passive face of Mr.
They may be uncommonly useful to fellows in a small way.
Hence the brothers showed a thoroughly neutral gravity as they re-entered with Mr.
No soul except herself knew what had passed on that final night.
"The will I hold in my hand," said Mr.
And there is farther, I see" - Mr.
"I shall begin by reading the earlier will," continued Mr.
Standish's bald head; excepting Mary Garth's.
Vincy and Rosamond were each to have a hundred.
Altogether, reckoning hastily, here were about three thousand disposed of.
Fred bit his lips: it was difficult to help smiling, and Mrs?
There was a rustling which seemed like a shudder running round the room.
Every one stared afresh at Mr.
Rigg, who apparently experienced no surprise.
"A most singular testamentary disposition!" exclaimed Mr.
Trumbull, preferring for once that he should be considered ignorant in the past.
"But there is a second will - there is a further document.
We have not yet heard the final wishes of the deceased.
Nobody present had a farthing; but Mr.
Trumbull had the gold-headed cane.
It took some time for the company to recover the power of expression.
Mary dared not look at Fred.
I should say this last will was void," added Mr.
Vincy, feeling that this expression put the thing in the true light.
"Our deceased friend always knew what he was about, I think," said Mr.
Here is a letter from Clemmens of Brassing tied with the will.
Featherstone," said Borthrop Trumbull, "but I call this will eccentric.
For my part, I wish there was no such thing as a will.
"I should like to know how you will back that up, Garth!".
It always seemed to him that words were the hardest part of "business.
Jonah Featherstone made himself heard.
"Well, he always was a fine hypocrite, was my brother Peter.
But this will cuts out everything.
I'll put a white hat and drab coat on to-morrow.
But if the Almighty's allowed it, he means to punish him for it.
Brother Solomon, I shall be going, if you'll drive me.
"I've no desire to put my foot on the premises again," said Solomon.
"It's a poor tale how luck goes in the world," said Jonah.
"It never answers to have a bit of spirit in you.
You'd better be a dog in the manger.
But those above ground might learn a lesson.
One fool's will is enough in a family.
"There's more ways than one of being a fool," said Solomon.
Solomon addressed these remarks in a loud aside to Mrs.
Waule as he rose to accompany her.
Standish and putting business questions with much coolness.
He had a high chirping voice and a vile accent.
But Fred was feeling rather sick.
The Middlemarch mercer waited for an opportunity of engaging Mr.
Also, the mercer, as a second cousin, was dispassionate enough to feel curiosity.
"Good-by," she said, with affectionate sadness.
I do believe you are better without the money.
What was the good of it to Mr.
"That's all very fine," said Fred, pettishly.
"What is a fellow to do?
I must go into the Church now?
And you have not even a hundred pounds left you.
What shall you do now, Mary?
"Take another situation, of course, as soon as I can get one.
My father has enough to do to keep the rest, without me.
Historical parallels are remarkably efficient in this way.
Fred made no answer: he was too utterly depressed.
But he went away silently and his mother pleaded for him.
"Don't be hard on the poor boy, Vincy.
He'll turn out well yet, though that wicked man has deceived him.
"Took it away again!" said Mr.
"I tell you the lad's an unlucky lad, Lucy.
And you've always spoiled him.
You were as proud as proud," said Mrs.
Vincy, easily recovering her cheerful smile.
"Who knows what babies will turn to?
"But who has handsomer, better children than ours?
And Rosamond - where is there a girl like her?
Not but what I could have wished Rosamond had not engaged herself.
There are relations in that family quite as high as Mr.
Vincy; "I've had enough of them.
"Why, my dear," said Mrs.
Vincy, "you seemed as pleased as could be about it.
"Not by my will," said Mr.
I shan't give my consent to their marrying.
Let 'em wait, as their elders have done before 'em.
The sooner the engagement's off, the better.
I don't believe he'll ever make an income, the way he goes on.
He makes enemies; that's all I hear of his making.
"But he stands very high with Mr.
The marriage would please HIM, I should think.
"Please the deuce!" said Mr.
"Bulstrode won't pay for their keep.
I expect I shall have to put down my horses soon.
You'd better tell Rosy what I say.
This was a not infrequent procedure with Mr.
"What do you say, my dear?
" said her mother, with affectionate deference?
"Papa does not mean anything of the kind," said Rosamond, quite calmly.
And I shall marry Mr.
It is seven weeks now since papa gave his consent.
And I hope we shall have Mrs.
"Well, my dear, I shall leave you to manage your papa.
You always do manage everybody.
And you hear, your papa says he will give no money.
"You cannot imagine that I should ask him, mamma.
Of course he understands his own affairs.
"That has nothing to do with my marriage, mamma.
Fred must leave off being idle.
Mary Garth might do some work for me now, I should think.
Her sewing is exquisite; it is the nicest thing I know about Mary.
I should so like to have all my cambric frilling double-hemmed.
And it takes a long time.
Vincy's belief that Rosamond could manage her papa was well founded.
Apart from his dinners and his coursing, Mr.
The indirect though emphatic expression of opinion to which Mr.
Vincy preferred playing was that of the generous host whom nobody criticises.
The certainty that Miss Vincy and Mr.
Lydgate were engaged became general in Middlemarch without the aid of formal announcement.
His replies were not satisfactory.
Did you shut your house up against Lydgate?
Bulstrode has pushed him forward more than anybody?
I never made any fuss about the young fellow.
You should go and talk to your husband about it, not me.
"Well, really, Walter, how can Mr.
I am sure he did not wish for the engagement?
Bulstrode, losing her clew in the intricacies of the subject.
"I don't know about mercy," said Mr.
"I know I am worried more than I like with my family.
Bulstrode, wishing to rouse her husband's feelings.
"Truly, my dear," said Mr.
I could have wished that Mr.
Marriage, of course, must be prepared for in the usual way.
"But a better order will begin after.
Here am I with nothing but my pipe and pond-animalcules.
He had to be deferential when Mr.
"Dear! your eyelids are red.
" It was not in her nature to pour forth wishes or grievances.
They only came forth gracefully on solicitation.
"As if you could hide it from me!"?
said Lydgate, laying his hand tenderly on both of hers?
"Don't I see a tiny drop on one of the lashes?
Things trouble you, and you don't tell me?
"Why should I tell you what you cannot alter?
They are every-day things: - perhaps they have been a little worse lately?
"Papa has been more irritable lately.
Rosamond hesitated, and her cheeks were gathering a slight flush.
He kissed the hesitating lips gently, as if to encourage them.
"Will you give it up?
" said Lydgate, with quick energy - almost angrily?
"God bless you!" said Lydgate, kissing her again.
This constancy of purpose in the right place was adorable.
You are of age, and I claim you as mine.
"Why should we defer it?
" he said, with ardent insistence?
You will not mind about new clothes?
Those can be bought afterwards.
Come, dear, tell me how soon you can be altogether mine.
"There would be the house-linen and the furniture to be prepared.
Still, mamma could see to those while we were away.
We must be away a week or so.
"Oh, more than that!" said Rosamond, earnestly.
"Whatever you wish, my darling, when the day is fixed.
Six weeks! - I am sure they would be ample.
"I could certainly hasten the work," said Rosamond.
"Will you, then, mention it to papa?
- I think it would be better to write to him?
Furnishing was necessarily expensive; but then it had to be done only once.
"It must be lovely," said Mrs.
Vincy, when Lydgate mentioned his purchase with some descriptive touches.
"Just what Rosy ought to have.
I trust in heaven it won't be broken!".
"One must hire servants who will not break things," said Lydgate.
(Certainly, this was reasoning with an imperfect vision of sequences.
Lydgate wished to be married soon.
"Nonsense, my dear!" said Mr.
"What has he got to marry on?
You'd much better give up the engagement?
I've told you so pretty plainly before this.
It's a cruel thing for a father to see?
Lydgate is not poor, papa.
Peacock's practice, which, they say, is worth eight or nine hundred a-year.
"Stuff and nonsense! What's buying a practice?
He might as well buy next year's swallows?
It'll all slip through his fingers.
"On the contrary, papa, he will increase the practice.
See how he has been called in by the Chettams and Casaubons.
"Dear papa! what can that have to do with my marriage?
"I am sure he expects nothing, papa.
He is engaged in making scientific discoveries.
"I cannot give up my only prospect of happiness, papa Mr.
I could never love any one who was not a perfect gentleman.
And you know that I never change my mind.
"Promise me, papa, that you will consent to what we wish.
There was a little more urgency of this kind, till Mr.
Not without prudential considerations, however.
He was too proud to act as if he presupposed that Mr.
All these matters were by the bye.
Which of your uncles do you like best?
"Oh, - my uncle Godwin, I think.
He is a good-natured old fellow.
Does he know you are going to be married?
"No," said Lydgate, carelessly, turning in his chair and rubbing his hair up.
"Do send him word of it, you naughty undutiful nephew.
It is not fair that I should be so ignorant of yours.
But perhaps you would be a little ashamed of me.
"I will write to him, then.
But my cousins are bores.
"I hope your uncle Sir Godwin will not look down on Rosy, Mr.
I should think he would do something handsome.
A thousand or two can be nothing to a baronet.
Mamma had a little filial lecture afterwards, and was docile as usual.
The doubt hinted by Mr.
So much the worse for him.
I've had my eye on him for some time.
He shall be prettily pumped upon.
He's a damned bad landlord.
As to his paper, I only hope he may do the writing himself?
It would be worth our paying for.
And he means to take very high ground on Reform.
"Let Brooke reform his rent-roll.
I sup pose this young fellow is some loose fish from London.
He is said to be of foreign extraction.
"I know the sort," said Mr.
"You must concede that there are abuses, Hawley," said Mr.
Hackbutt, foreseeing some political disagreement with his family lawyer.
"Large towns be damned!" said Mr.
"I know a little too much about Middlemarch elections.
"He seems to me a kind of Shelley, you know," Mr.
Brooke took an opportunity of saying, for the gratification of Mr.
If the right tack implied anything more precise than the rest of Mr.
And Casaubon had done a wrong to Dorothea in marrying her.
If she spoke with any keenness of interest to Mr.
Necessity excused stratagem, but stratagem was limited by the dread of offending Dorothea.
But the stratagem was defeated by the weather.
Casaubon does not like to be disturbed when he is in the library.
"Master is out, sir; there's only Mrs.
Casaubon has gone to the Archdeacon's," she said, at once.
"I don't know whether he will be at home again long before dinner.
He was uncertain how long he should be.
Did you want to say anything particular to him?
"No; I came to sketch, but the rain drove me in.
Else I would not have disturbed you yet.
Casaubon was here, and I know he dislikes interruption at this hour.
"I am indebted to the rain, then.
I am so glad to see you.
He could not stay to ask himself, why not?
"I wanted to talk about things, as we did in Rome?
It always makes a difference when other people are present.
"Yes," said Dorothea, in her clear full tone of assent.
"It seems strange to me how many things I said to you.
"You correct me," said Dorothea.
Are you not too much shut up?
It would be better for Mr.
"How can you think of that?
" said Dorothea, in a tone of earnest remonstrance?
There is no good to be done in Lowick?
The only thing I desire is to help him more.
And he objects to a secretary: please not to mention that again.
"Certainly not, now I know your feeling.
But I have heard both Mr.
Brooke and Sir James Chettam express the same wish.
Casaubon cannot bear to hear of a secretary.
"My mistake is excusable," said Will.
"In old days I used to hear Mr.
Casaubon speak as if he looked forward to having a secretary.
Indeed he held out the prospect of that office to me.
But I turned out to be - not good enough for it.
Casaubon's glory, he went on, "And I have seen since that Mr.
Casaubon does not like any one to overlook his work.
and know thoroughly what he is doing.
He is too doubtful - too uncertain of himself.
And the cause lay deep.
"Yes; he has shown a sense of justice in family matters.
"I wish I knew all about her!" said Dorothea.
They both died rather early.
"I have always had too much of everything.
But tell me how it was-Mr.
Casaubon could not have known about you then.
"No; but my father had made himself known to Mr.
Casaubon, and that was my last hungry day.
But now I am telling you what is not new to you.
Casaubon had never done more than pay a debt towards him.
Casaubon has always avoided dwelling on his own honorable actions.
"No; she died by an accident - a fall - four years ago.
"You teach me better," said Will.
"I will never grumble on that subject again.
"That is very good of you," said Dorothea, with another open smile.
"I shall have a little kingdom then, where I shall give laws.
But you will soon go away, out of my rule, I imagine.
You will soon be tired of staying at the Grange.
Brooke proposes that I should stay in this neighborhood.
"Would not that be a sacrifice of higher prospects for you?
And here is something offered to me.
I belong to nobody anywhere else.
"But my opinion is of little consequence on such a subject.
I think you should be guided by Mr.
But it now occurs to me-perhaps Mr.
Casaubon might see that the proposal was not wise.
Can you not wait now and mention it to him?
"I can't wait to-day," said Will, inwardly seared by the possibility that Mr.
"The rain is quite over now.
Brooke not to call for me: I would rather walk the five miles.
" No, he dared not, could not say it.
Casaubon's wishes, but for her to urge this might seem an undue dictation.
Casaubon's carriage, which, however, did not appear at the gate until four o'clock.
"I have had the gratification of meeting my former acquaintance, Dr.
" In uttering the last clause, Mr.
Casaubon, throwing himself backward again.
" Her husband she felt was really concerned in this question.
Casaubon had a claim to be consulted.
He did not speak, but merely bowed.
"Dear uncle, you know, has many projects.
" she added, rather timidly, after a slight pause?
Ladislaw come on purpose to ask my opinion?
Casaubon, opening his eyes narrowly with a knife-edged look at Dorothea.
"I feared that you might feel some objection.
Ladislaw wishes to have some fixed occupation.
Dorothea felt that this was a consideration to soften her husband.
However, he did not speak, and she presently recurred to Dr.
Spanning and the Archdeacon's breakfast.
But there was no longer sunshine on these subjects.
The next morning, without Dorothea's knowledge, Mr.
Casaubon despatched the following letter, beginning "Dear Mr.
Ladislaw" (he had always before addressed him as "Will"): -.
I will not here make reflections on any person's judgment.
Was inheritance a question of liking or of responsibility?
It was true, she said to herself, that Mr.
That ought to be altered; and no time ought to be lost.
She suspected that her uncle's scheme was disapproved by Mr.
Will Ladislaw had refused Mr.
Casaubon had never himself seen fully what was the claim upon him.
"But he will!" said Dorothea.
"The great strength of his character lies here.
And what are we doing with our money?
We make no use of half of our income?
My own money buys me nothing but an uneasy conscience.
Casaubon had sent his letter to Will.
The day passed in a sombre fashion, not unusual, though Mr.
And this night she was from the beginning sleepless, excited by resolves.
"Dorothea, since you are up, will you light a candle?
"Do you feel ill, dear?
" was her first question, as she obeyed him?
"May I talk to you a little instead?
"These, my dear Dorothea, are providential arrangements.
"What, my love, is the bearing of your remark?
I have none but comparatively distant connections?
It was on that ground, I know, that you educated Mr.
Ladislaw and provided for his mother.
Dorothea waited a few moments for some answer that would help her onward.
Ladislaw has probably been speaking to you on this subject?
Casaubon, with a certain biting quickness not habitual to him.
"Indeed, no!" said Dorothea, earnestly.
I fear you think too hardly of him, dear?
There was a perceptible pause before Mr.
Casaubon replied, not quickly as before, but with a still more biting emphasis.
Suffice it, that you are not here qualified to discriminate.
It is not for you to interfere between me and Mr.
Poor Dorothea, shrouded in the darkness, was in a tumult of conflicting emotions.
Casaubon received the following answer from Will Ladislaw: -.
They may possibly clash with more imperative considerations.
I am merely using strong illustrations.
Casaubon felt (and must not we, being impartial, feel with him a little?
) that no man had juster cause for disgust and suspicion than he?
Not for one moment did Mr.
And now, on receiving Will's letter, Mr.
Casaubon had to consider his duty.
Should he apply directly to Mr.
Brooke, and demand of that troublesome gentleman to revoke his proposal?
Casaubon was aware that failure was just as probable as success.
Depend upon it, I have put my finger on the right thing.
Casaubon was distrustful of everybody's feeling towards him, especially as a husband.
" All through his life Mr.
Casaubon remained proudly, bitterly silent.
Sir James Chettam could not look with any satisfaction on Mr.
Brooke's new courses; but it was easier to object than to hinder.
Indeed, it would not be right.
Cadwallader, almost before the last word was off her friend's tongue.
"Is he really going to be put in nomination, though?
Bulstrode, the banker, is his foremost man.
But he thinks Brooke would come off badly at a nomination.
"Exactly," said Sir James, with earnestness.
Hawley's rather rough: he forgot that he was speaking to me.
"I warned you all of it," said Mrs.
Cadwallader, waving her hands outward.
"I said to Humphrey long ago, Mr.
Brooke is going to make a splash in the mud.
And now he has done it.
"That would have been a graver mess than a little flirtation with politics.
"He may do that afterwards," said Mrs.
"What I care for most is his own dignity," said Sir James.
"Of course I care the more because of the family.
They will be raking up everything against him.
"I suppose it's no use trying any persuasion," said the Rector.
"There's such an odd mixture of obstinacy and changeableness in Brooke.
Have you tried him on the subject?
"Well, no," said Sir James; "I feel a delicacy in appearing to dictate.
Ladislaw seems clever enough for anything.
"The independent member hasn't got his speeches well enough by heart.
"But this Ladislaw - there again is a vexatious business," said Sir James.
"Casaubon won't like that," said the Rector.
"There IS some foreign blood in Ladislaw," returned Sir James.
"I hope he won't go into extreme opinions and carry Brooke on.
"Oh, he's a dangerous young sprig, that Mr.
Cadwallader, "with his opera songs and his ready tongue.
A sort of Byronic hero - an amorous conspirator, it strikes me.
And Thomas Aquinas is not fond of him.
I could see that, the day the picture was brought.
"I don't like to begin on the subject with Casaubon," said Sir James.
"He has more right to interfere than I.
But it's a disagreeable affair all round.
' I saw him the other day with Hawley.
"What can you expect with these peddling Middlemarch papers?
For my part, I think Ladislaw is rather a fool for accepting.
"It is Aquinas's fault," said Mrs.
That is how families get rid of troublesome sprigs?
"But if Casaubon says nothing, what can I do?
It is likely enough to end in mere smoke.
"If I knew the items of election expenses I could scare him.
"There is the management of his estate.
they have begun upon that already.
And it really is painful for me to see.
It is a nuisance under one's very nose.
"I know I should be glad.
I should hear less grumbling when my tithe is paid.
"In the right of it too," said the Rector.
"Garth is an independent fellow: an original, simple-minded fellow.
I wish, by the help of the `Trumpet,' you could bring that round.
She had wonderfully good notions about such things.
But now Casaubon takes her up entirely.
Celia complains a good deal.
" Sir James ended with a look of pitying disgust, and Mrs.
"Poor Casaubon!" the Rector said.
"That was a nasty attack.
I thought he looked shattered the other day at the Archdeacon's.
"Come, that's a blessing," said Mrs.
"That helps him to find himself in a morning.
Cadwallader, who had risen to look out of the window.
"But talk of an independent politician and he will appear.
What will you do, Sir James?
"Here you all are, eh?
Brooke, shuffling round and shaking hands.
"I was going up to the Hall by-and-by, Chettam.
But it's pleasant to find everybody, you know.
Well, what do you think of things?
Going on faster than we are.
"Why, yes," said the Rector, taking up the newspaper.
"Here is the `Trumpet' accusing you of lagging behind - did you see?
Brooke, dropping his gloves into his hat and hastily adjusting his eye-glass.
They say he is the most retrogressive man in the county.
I think you must have taught them that word in the `Pioneer.
"Oh, that is Keek - an illiterate fellow, you know.
Retrogressive, now! Come, that's capital.
Brooke, with that cheerfulness which is usually sustained by an adversary's ignorance.
"I think he knows the meaning of the word.
Here is a sharp stroke or two.
Brooke with an air of amused neutrality.
"Come, that's rather good, you know," said Mr.
Satire, you know, should be true up to a certain point.
One ought to use some of one's timber in that way.
"You go in for fancy farming, you know, Chettam," said Mr.
Brooke, appearing to glance over the columns of the "Trumpet.
" "That's your hobby, and you don't mind the expense.
"They said the last unsuccessful candidate at Middlemarch - Giles, wasn't his name?
-spent ten thousand pounds and failed because he did not bribe enough?
What a bitter reflection for a man!".
"Nothing of the kind," said Mr.
Middlemarch is a little backward, I admit-the freemen are a little backward.
But we shall educate them-we shall bring them on, you know.
The best people there are on our side.
"He says Bulstrode the banker will do you harm.
"And that if you got pelted," interposed Mrs.
Cadwallader, "half the rotten eggs would mean hatred of your committee-man.
Good heavens! Think what it must be to be pelted for wrong opinions.
"Pelting is nothing to their finding holes in one's coat," said the Rector.
I should be afraid of their reckoning up all my fishing days.
He must make himself proof against calumny.
"My dear Chettam, that is all very fine, you know," said Mr.
"But how will you make yourself proof against calumny?
They always happen to the best men, you know.
But what is that in Horace?
"Exactly," said Sir James, with a little more heat than usual.
But it was Sir James's evident annoyance that most stirred Mr.
You are all for outlay with your farms.
"Returns are very well occasionally, but I like a fair valuation.
What do you say, Cadwallader?
"That's a showy sort of thing to do, you know," said Mr.
I let the old tenants stay on.
I'm uncommonly easy, let me tell you, uncommonly easy.
When I change my line of action, I shall follow my own ideas.
"But you were pulling one way, Elinor, and we were pulling another.
But it does signify about the parishioners in Tipton being comfortable.
If you put him a-horseback on politics, I warn you of the consequences.
In this way it happened that one day near four o'clock, when Mr.
Brooke and Ladislaw were seated in the library, the door opened and Mrs.
Will, too, was made of very impressible stuff?
Dorothea's entrance was the freshness of morning.
"Well, my dear, this is pleasant, now," said Mr.
Brooke, meeting and kissing her.
"You have left Casaubon with his books, I suppose.
We must not have you getting too learned for a woman, you know.
"Why, yes, my dear, it was quite your hobby to draw plans.
But it was good to break that off a little.
We must keep the reins.
I have never let myself be run away with; I always pulled up.
That is what I tell Ladislaw.
He and I are alike, you know: he likes to go into everything.
We are working at capital punishment.
We shall do a great deal together, Ladislaw and I.
Garth, who praised my cottages, Sir James says.
"Chettam is a little hasty, my dear," said Mr.
Brooke, coloring slightly; "a little hasty, you know.
I never said I should do anything of the kind.
I never said I should NOT do it, you know.
For the moment, Will's admiration was accompanied with a chilling sense of remoteness.
At last he said -.
You and I don't like our pictures and statues being found fault with?
I shall let him off easily, you know," said Mr.
Brooke aside to Dorothea, shuffling away very cheerfully.
"I do, now I have heard you speak about it.
I shall not forget what you have said.
But can you think of something else at this moment?
Casaubon has forbidden me to go to his house.
"No, I did not," said Dorothea, after a moment's pause.
She was evidently much moved.
"I am very, very sorry," she added, mournfully.
Casaubon's dislike and jealousy of him turned upon herself.
I have told him that I cannot give way on this point.
I am not bound to regard family dignity in any other light.
" She was looking out on the lawn, with melancholy meditation?
"No," said Dorothea, turning her eyes full upon him, "hardly ever.
But I shall hear of you.
I shall know what you are doing for my uncle.
"I shall know hardly anything about you," said Will.
"No one will tell me anything.
"I am always at Lowick.
"That is a dreadful imprisonment," said Will, impetuously.
"No, don't think that," said Dorothea.
He did not speak, but she replied to some change in his expression.
But I have a belief of my own, and it comforts me.
" said Will, rather jealous of the belief?
"That is a beautiful mysticism - it is a - ".
"You will say it is Persian, or something else geographical.
I have found it out, and cannot part with it.
I used to pray so much - now I hardly ever pray.
"To love what is good and beautiful when I see it," said Will.
"Now you are subtle," said Will.
Casaubon often says I am too subtle.
I don't feel as if I were subtle," said Dorothea, playfully.
"But how long my uncle is! I must go and look for him.
I must really go on to the Hall.
Will offered to tell Mr.
Dorothea renewed the subject of the estate as they drove along, but Mr.
Brooke, not being taken unawares, got the talk under his own control.
He was pretty quick, and knocked it on the neck.
"That was very brutal, I think," said Dorothea.
And Johnson said, `You may judge what a hypoCRITE he is.
However, it doesn't do to reason about things; and law is law.
But I got Johnson to be quiet, and I hushed the matter up.
But here we are at Dagley's.
Brooke got down at a farmyard-gate, and Dorothea drove on.
Dagley's homestead never before looked so dismal to Mr.
But these troublesome associations were just now strongly present to Mr.
Brooke, and spoiled the scene for him.
"Dagley, my good fellow," began Mr.
Brooke, conscious that he was going to be very friendly about the boy.
"Oh, ay, I'm a good feller, am I?
"I'm glad to hear I'm a good feller.
"How do you do, Mrs.
" He was careful to speak quite plainly this time.
But her husband was beforehand in answering.
Go to Middlemarch to ax for YOUR charrickter.
But I should like to know what my boy's done, sir.
An' I wull speak, too.
I'll hev my say - supper or no.
"My good fellow, you're drunk, you know," said Mr.
Brooke, confidentially but not judiciously.
"Another day, another day," he added, turning as if to go.
"I'm no more drunk nor you are, nor so much," said Dagley.
"I can carry my liquor, an' I know what I meean.
Says they, `I know who YOUR landlord is.
' Says they, `He's a close-fisted un.
' `Ay ay,' says I.
`He's a man for the Rinform,' says they.
That's what I'n got to say," concluded Mr.
Two letters of the nine had been for Mary.
"Oh, don't sew, Mary!" said Ben, pulling her arm down.
"Make me a peacock with this bread-crumb.
" He had been kneading a small mass for the purpose.
"Try and mould it yourself: you have seen me do it often enough.
I must get this sewing done.
" Mary ended merrily, amused with the last notion.
"Have you made up your mind, my dear?
Garth, laying the letters down.
"I shall go to the school at York," said Mary.
"I am less unfit to teach in a school than in a family.
I like to teach classes best.
And, you see, I must teach: there is nothing else to be done.
"Teaching seems to me the most delightful work in the world," said Mrs.
Garth, with a touch of rebuke in her tone.
"I am not fond of a schoolroom: I like the outside world better.
It is a very inconvenient fault of mine.
"Such a set of nincompoops, like Mrs.
Ballard's pupils walking two and two.
"And they have no games worth playing at," said Jim.
"They can neither throw nor leap.
I don't wonder at Mary's not liking it.
"What is that Mary doesn't like, eh?
"Being among a lot of nincompoop girls," said Alfred.
"Is it the situation you had heard of, Mary?
" said Caleb, gently, looking at his daughter?
"Yes, father: the school at York.
I have determined to take it.
It is quite the best.
"Mary would not be happy without doing her duty," said Mrs.
Garth, magisterially, conscious of having done her own.
And suppose that Mary could help you to go to Mr.
Hanmer's with the money she gets?
"That seems to me a great shame.
Mary colored and laughed, but could not conceal that the tears were coming.
It was from Sir James Chettam, offering to Mr.
Brooke of Tipton to ascertain whether Mr.
"He writes handsomely, doesn't he, Susan?
"Here is an honor to your father, children," said Mrs.
"Will they come to fetch him, mother?
" said Letty, thinking of the Mayor and Corporation in their robes?
"Now, mind you ask fair pay, Caleb.
"It'll come to between four and five hundred, the two together.
Stay and help your mother.
I'm as pleased as Punch, now I've thought of that.
At last he said -.
"It's a thousand pities Christy didn't take to business, Susan.
I shall want help by-and-by.
I must look into that: it would cheapen the repairs.
"Mind you don't, though," said his wife, lifting up her finger.
I'd sooner have it than a fortune.
I hold it the most honorable work that is.
"That it is, Caleb," said his wife, with answering fervor.
" She could not say any more to him then about the pay.
Garth was more of a lady than any matron in the town.
In those days human intercourse was not determined solely by respect.
Mary's heart beat rather quickly: she wondered how far Fred's confidence had gone.
"We haven't seen the lad for months," said Caleb.
"I couldn't think what was become of him.
But yesterday he came and poured himself out to me.
But it is a difficult case to advise upon.
"Tell him it doesn't signify a farthing," said Caleb, waving his hand.
"We've had the pinch and have got over it.
And now I'm going to be as rich as a Jew.
It makes me very happy, Mr.
"I congratulate you heartily, Garth," said the Vicar.
I have advised him to do that.
I don't urge him to enter the Church - on the contrary.
He quoted to me what you said, Miss Garth-do you remember it?
Vincy's phrase, she worked for her bread.
Really, that was so cutting that I felt a little cut myself.
"She gets her tongue from you, Susan," he said, with some enjoyment.
"It was certainly a hasty speech, my dear," said Mrs.
Garth, with whom speaking evil of dignities was a high misdemeanor.
"A bad workman of any sort makes his fellows mistrusted.
"Clearly," said the Vicar, amused.
"By being contemptible we set men's minds, to the tune of contempt.
There was something quite diabolical in not leaving him a farthing after all.
But Fred has the good taste not to dwell on that.
And what he cares most about is having offended you, Mrs.
Garth; he supposes you will never think well of him again.
"I have been disappointed in Fred," said Mrs.
At this point Mary went out of the room, taking Letty with her.
"And as you say, Mr.
Farebrother, there was the very devil in that old man.
The old man did turn to him at the last.
Now, what is your opinion, sir?
Susan doesn't agree with me?
She says - tell what you say, Susan.
Garth, pausing from her work, and looking at Mr.
"And she was quite ignorant of it.
The Vicar did not answer immediately, and Caleb said, "It's the feeling.
The child feels in that way, and I feel with her.
Garth would agree with you there," said Mr.
Farebrother, who for some reason seemed more inclined to ruminate than to speak.
"Well, well," said Caleb, "it's a secret.
You will not tell Fred.
"Have you any message for your old playfellow, Miss Garth?
"Something to soften down that harsh judgment?
I am going straight to see him?
"No," said Mary, shaking her head, and smiling.
You will really be doing a kindness.
"I should like it very much, if I may," said Mary.
"Everything seems too happy for me all at once.
"May I go with you, Mary?
" whispered Letty - a most inconvenient child, who listened to everything?
Farebrother-an incident which she narrated to her mother and father.
The rejoinder to this was the first shrug.
Whereupon followed the second shrug.
Garth were sitting alone, Caleb said, "Susan, guess what I'm thinking of.
"The rotation of crops," said Mrs.
"What care I about their objecting?
"The lad is of age and must get his bread.
They all think us beneath them.
And if the proposal came from you, I am sure Mrs.
Vincy would say that we wanted Fred for Mary.
"Yes, but there is a certain pride which is proper, Caleb.
It is not easy to keep people against their will?
"Well, it may be better to wait a bit.
And who do you think they were?
His wife held down her knitting and looked attentive.
"Why, that Rigg, or Rigg Featherstone, was one.
But Bulstrode was before him, so I'm going to do it for Bulstrode.
Whether it's mortgage or purchase they're going for, I can't tell yet.
And it's a difficult matter to get, in this part of the country.
The old man hated him, and never would bank with him.
"Pooh! where's the use of asking for such fellows' reasons?
The transactions referred to by Caleb Garth as having gone forward between Mr.
Who shall tell what may be the effect of writing?
Such conditions are often minutely represented in our petty lifetimes.
Socially speaking, Joshua Rigg would have been generally pronounced a superfluity.
Rigg Featherstone's low characteristics were all of the sober, water-drinking kind.
His name was John Raffles, and he sometimes wrote jocosely W.
Such were the appearance and mental flavor of Mr.
"What I give her, you'll take.
"You bear me a grudge, Josh, that I know.
The tobacco trade is growing.
I should always be on the spot.
And nothing would make your poor mother so happy.
I've pretty well done with my wild oats-turned fifty-five.
I want to settle down in my chimney-corner.
I was always fond of the old woman, by Jove!".
Rigg, quietly, without looking away from the window.
"Then just listen to me.
The more you say anything, the less I shall believe it.
I should be glad to see you whipped at the cart-tail?
Honor bright! I'll go like a bullet, BY Jove!".
But the brandy and the sovereign's a bargain.
Rigg saw him leave the grounds and enter the lane.
That was the way with Mr.
Instead of wondering at this result of misery in Mr.
Casaubon, I think it quite ordinary.
I know no speck so troublesome as self?
Casaubon's power of suspicious construction into exasperated activity.
The human soul moves in many channels, and Mr.
The way in which Mr.
That would be calamity for her and success for him.
He thinks of an easy conquest and of entering into my nest.
That I will hinder! Such a marriage would be fatal to Dorothea.
Has he ever persisted in anything except from contradiction?
In knowledge he has always tried to be showy at small cost?
When was sciolism ever dissociated from laxity?
The arrangements made by Mr.
You need not see him, my dear.
When Lydgate entered the Yew-tree Walk he saw Mr.
But there was nothing to strike others as sublime about Mr?
"You refer to the possible hindrances from want of health?
" he said, wishing to help forward Mr?
Casaubon's purpose, which seemed to be clogged by some hesitation.
But were it so, Mr.
If not, knowledge of the truth is even more important to me.
In any ease, one can hardly increase appreciably the tremendous uncertainty of life.
Casaubon winced perceptibly, but bowed.
At the same time, no such result can be predicted.
Casaubon as a tribute of respect.
Casaubon, after a moment's pause.
"Partly - I mean, as to the possible issues.
" Lydgate was going to explain why he had told Dorothea, but Mr.
Casaubon's bias his acts will give us a clew to.
You may ask why, in the name of manliness, Mr.
Casaubon should have behaved in that way.
Dorothea did not withdraw her arm, but she could not venture to speak.
He entered the library and shut himself in, alone with his sorrow.
She went up to her boudoir.
But Dorothea knew nothing of the scene.
Instead of tears there came words: -.
He never knows what is in my mind - he never cares?
What is the use of anything I do?
He wishes he had never married me?
She began to hear herself, and was checked into stillness.
" but would have felt him simply a part of her own life?
Now she said bitterly, "It is his fault, not mine.
" In the jar of her whole being, Pity was overthrown.
- And what, exactly, was he?
In such a crisis as this, some women begin to hate.
He might wonder and be hurt at her message.
It was good that he should wonder and be hurt.
He wished to be quite alone this evening, being much occupied.
"I shall not dine, then, Tantripp.
"Oh, madam, let me bring you a little something?
"No; I am not well.
She would never again expect anything else.
"Dorothea!" he said, with a gentle surprise in his tone.
"Were you waiting for me?
"Yes, I did not like to disturb you.
You are young, and need not to extend your life by watching.
Poor Dorothea needed to lay up stores of patience.
And he was not at home.
"I will go in and speak to her, if she will allow me.
Will you ask her if she can see me - see Mrs.
Casaubon, for a few minutes?
Lydgate would be happy to see Mrs.
Casaubon should have an opportunity of studying HER.
"Thank you very much for allowing me to interrupt you," said Dorothea, immediately.
"I am anxious to see Mr.
But I can send for him,".
"Will you let me go and fetch him?
" said Will Ladislaw, coming forward?
He had already taken up his hat before Dorothea entered.
"May I go to the Hospital and tell Mr.
Lydgate that you wish to see him?
I wish to lose no time before getting home again.
I will drive to the Hospital and see Mr.
I am very much obliged to you.
She took the arm but said nothing.
Lydgate in her husband's absence.
Casaubon's relative, and one towards whom she was bound to show kindness.
Casaubon did not like his cousin's visits during his own absence.
But the carriage stopped at the gate of the Hospital.
Will Ladislaw, meanwhile, was mortified, and knew the reason of it clearly enough.
Lydgate, who had seated herself at her work-table, said -.
"It is always fatal to have music or poetry interrupted.
"I shall be happy to be taught," said Rosamond.
I quite envy your acquaintance with Mrs.
She looks as if she were?
"Really, I never thought about it," said Will, sulkily.
"Herself," said Will, not indisposed to provoke the charming Mrs.
"He will come back and think nothing of me.
"That does not seem to have been the effect on Lydgate hitherto.
Casaubon is too unlike other women for them to be compared with her.
"You are a devout worshipper, I perceive.
You often see her, I suppose.
"No," said Will, almost pettishly.
"Worship is usually a matter of theory rather than of practice.
"Pray come again some evening: Mr.
Ladislaw was here singing with me when Mrs.
Do you think he disliked her seeing him at our house?
"Music apart, he is not always very agreeable.
"Do you know, I think he adores Mrs.
"Poor devil!" said Lydgate, smiling and pinching his wife's ears.
At that time young ladies in the country, even when educated at Mrs.
When he said, "Poor devil I" she asked, with playful curiosity -.
He only neglects his work and runs up bills?
"I am sure you do not neglect your work.
Confess you like those things better than me.
"I shall make you learn my favorite bit from an old poet -.
`Why should our pride make such a stir to be And be forgot?
A man must work, to do that, my pet.
You cannot say that I have ever tried to hinder you from working.
But we cannot live like hermits.
You are not discontented with me, Tertius?
I am too entirely contented.
Casaubon want to say to you?
"Merely to ask about her husband's health.
"I don't know whether your or Mr.
- Casaubon's attention has been drawn to the needs of our New Hospital.
"Yes, indeed," said Dorothea, brightening.
"There is everything to be done," said Lydgate, with abrupt energy.
"And this Hospital is a capital piece of work, due entirely to Mr.
Bulstrode's exertions, and in a great degree to his money.
But one man can't do everything in a scheme of this sort.
Of course he looked forward to help.
"What can be their reasons?
" said Dorothea, with naive surprise?
Bulstrode's unpopularity, to begin with.
Half the town would almost take trouble for the sake of thwarting him.
I had no connection with Bulstrode before I came here.
That's my point of view.
I hold that by refusing to work with Mr.
"But what is there against Mr.
I know that my uncle is friendly with him?
"People don't like his religious tone," said Lydgate, breaking off there.
Of course I am glad of that.
"How very petty!" exclaimed Dorothea, indignantly.
And the ignorance of people about here is stupendous.
"I am glad you have told me this, Mr.
"I feel sure I can help a little.
I will mention the subject to Mr.
I must hasten home now.
He distrusted her affection; and what loneliness is more lonely than distrust?
He regarded it as a mixture of jealousy and dunderheaded prejudice.
These might be called the ministerial views.
Minchin and the trenchant assertion of Mrs.
Dollop, the landlady of the Tankard in Slaughter Lane.
Dollop became more and more convinced by her own asseveration, that Dr.
If that was not reason, Mrs.
But these were people of minor importance.
And yet there are people who say quarantine is no good!"?
One of the facts quickly rumored was that Lydgate did not dispense drugs.
dared to ask for pay except as a charge on drugs.
Mawmsey - undermines the constitution in a fatal way.
But in truth his views were perturbed.
Gambit, and occasionally having attacks which required Dr.
Lydgate mean to say there is no use in taking medicine?
Mawmsey, who was slightly given to drawling.
Mawmsey, with your experience, you could have patience to listen.
"No, no, no," said Mr.
Mawmsey; "I was not going to tell him my opinion.
Hear everything and judge for yourself is my motto.
But he didn't know who he was talking to.
I was not to be turned on HIS finger.
' But I smile at it: I humor everybody's weak place.
Gambit was told that Lydgate went about saying physic was of no use.
"Indeed!" said he, lifting his eyebrows with cautious surprise.
) "How will he cure his patients, then?
"That is what I say," returned Mrs.
Mawmsey, who habitually gave weight to her speech by loading her pronouns.
Mawmsey had had a great deal of sitting from Mr.
So he replied, humorously -.
"Well, Lydgate is a good-looking young fellow, you know.
"Not one that I would employ," said Mrs.
"OTHERS may do as they please.
Other medical men felt themselves more capable.
Hawley, and hostile to Mr.
Peacock's successor did not mean to dispense medicines; and Mr.
Hackbutt one day mentioning it over the wine at a dinner-party, Mr.
Toller said, laughingly, "Dibbitts will get rid of his stale drugs, then.
I'm fond of little Dibbitts - I'm glad he's in luck.
"I see your meaning, Toller," said Mr.
Hackbutt, "and I am entirely of your opinion.
I shall take an opportunity of expressing myself to that effect.
A man can't very well be ostentatious of what nobody believes in.
Hawley, passing the decanter to Mr.
"As to humbug, Hawley," he said, "that's a word easy to fling about.
I throw back the imputation with scorn.
Wrench's voice had become exceedingly sharp.
"I can't oblige you there, Wrench," said Mr.
Hawley, thrusting his hands into his trouser-pockets.
"My dear fellow," said Mr.
Toller, striking in pacifically! and looking at Mr.
Wrench, "the physicians have their toes trodden on more than we have.
If you come to dignity it is a question for Minchin and Sprague.
"Does medical jurisprudence provide nothing against these infringements?
Hackbutt, with a disinterested desire to offer his lights.
"How does the law stand, eh, Hawley?
"Nothing to be done there," said Mr.
"I looked into it for Sprague.
You'd only break your nose against a damned judge's decision.
"Pooh! no need of law," said Mr.
"So far as practice is concerned the attempt is an absurdity.
No patient will like it-certainly not Peacock's, who have been used to depletion.
Toller's prediction was partly verified.
This co-operative measure was not to be mentioned to Lydgate, and Mr.
Larcher also; for when Lydgate's remarkable cure was mentioned to Dr.
How could Lydgate help himself?
In the case of a more conspicuous patient, Mr.
Peacock's, sent for Lydgate, whom he had expressed his intention to patronize.
For Lydgate was acute enough to indulge him with a little technical talk.
It may be imagined that Mr.
Wrench's enmity towards Lydgate more definite personal ground.
Meanwhile he framed his plan of management.
"Very well," said Lydgate to Mr.
" Lydgate was in high spirits.
"I shall not flinch, you may depend upon it, Mr.
Suitable directors to assist me I have no doubt of securing.
But he will be a useful member of the board.
The medical aversion to Lydgate was hardly disguised now.
The word charlatan once thrown on the air could not be let drop.
In those days the world was agitated about the wondrous doings of Mr.
Toller remarked one day, smilingly, to Mrs.
"Yes, indeed, I can imagine," said Mrs.
Toller, "Cheshire was all right - all fair and above board.
"Good gracious! what dreadful trifling with people's constitutions!" said Mrs.
For Lydgate having attended Mrs.
"They will not drive me away," he said, talking confidentially in Mr.
"I have no power of prophecy there," said Mr.
"How am I to be prudent?
" said Lydgate, "I just do what comes before me to do?
I can't help people's ignorance and spite, any more than Vesalius could.
"Quite true; I didn't mean that.
I meant only two things.
"Bulstrode is nothing to me," said Lydgate, carelessly, "except on public grounds.
But what was the other thing you meant?
You are right enough there.
But try and keep clear of wanting small sums that you haven't got.
Many thoughts cheered him at that time - and justly.
At home, that same evening when he had been chatting with Mr.
"Is that enough music for you, my lord?
" she said, leaning forward and bringing her face nearer to his?
He moved his hands and placed them gently behind her shoulders.
"I can't guess," said Rosamond, shaking her head.
"We used to play at guessing historical characters at Mrs.
I should have thought he might find some less horrible way than that.
You know how angry you told me the people were about Mrs.
You have enemies enough already.
They called him a liar and a poisonous monster.
"And what happened to him afterwards?
" said Rosamond, with some interest?
"Oh, he had a good deal of fighting to the last.
"Nay, Rosy, don't say that," said Lydgate, drawing her closer to him.
"That is like saying you wish you had married another man.
"The cousins at Quallingham may go to the devil!" said Lydgate, with scorn.
"Still," said Rosamond, "I do NOT think it is a nice profession, dear.
" We know that she had much quiet perseverance in her opinion.
"It is the grandest profession in the world, Rosamond," said Lydgate, gravely.
Don't say that again, dear, it pains me.
This was what Will Ladislaw dwelt on to Mr.
What we have to work at now is the `Pioneer' and political meetings.
I want to take up.
But of course I should support Grey.
I should put it in that light.
I should support Grey, you know.
"But that is what the country wants,"-said Will.
"That is fine, Ladislaw: that is the way to put it.
"As to documents," said Will, "a two-inch card will hold plenty.
"Good: draw that out a little more at length, Ladislaw.
That is an idea, now: write it out in the `Pioneer.
You have a way of putting things.
You'd never get elected, you know.
That avalanche and the thunder, now, was really a little like Burke.
Will was not displeased with that complimentary comparison, even from Mr.
"Shift the pegs a little," he said to himself, "and Mr.
Brooke might be in the Cabinet, while I was Under-Secretary.
I am better here than in the sort of life Mr.
I don't care for prestige or high pay.
Casaubon, who had declared beforehand that Will would lose caste.
Casaubon's nephew or cousin, it was also rumored that "Mr.
Casaubon would have nothing to do with him.
"Brooke has taken him up," said Mr.
Hawley, "because that is what no man in his senses could have expected.
And some oddities of Will's, more or less poetical, appeared to support Mr.
"That was a rattling article yesterday, Keck," said Dr.
"But what is an energumen?
"Oh, a term that came up in the French Revolution," said Keck.
He was invited to Mr.
Bulstrode's; but here he could not lie down on the rug, and Mrs.
"Do you suppose the public reads with a view to its own conversion?
"There's no harm in trying.
It's good to have resident members.
"He's not fitted to be a public man," said Lydgate, with contemptuous decision.
Only, there Bulstrode holds the reins and drives him.
"That depends on how you fix your standard of public men," said Will.
"That's very fine, my dear fellow.
That's my text-which side is injured?
"That general talk about a particular case is mere question begging, Ladislaw.
Should you go on that plan?
"Do you mean that I cry up Brooke on any personal ground?
" said Will Ladislaw, nettled, and turning sharp round?
"Not at all," said Lydgate, "I was simply explaining my own action.
"Then, why don't you extend your liberality to others?
" said Will, still nettled?
"My personal independence is as important to me as yours is to you.
Motives are points of honor, I suppose-nobody can prove them.
But as to money and place in the world.
"You quite mistake me, Ladislaw," said Lydgate, surprised.
"I beg your pardon for unintentionally annoying you.
On the political question, I referred simply to intellectual bias.
"How very unpleasant you both are this evening!" said Rosamond.
"I cannot conceive why money should have been referred to.
Polities and Medicine are sufficiently disagreeable to quarrel upon.
"Disputation is not amusing to cherubs.
Ask Ladislaw to sing with you.
It was Ladislaw who was out of temper?
He is like a bit of tinder.
"But I mean, before that.
Something had vexed you before you came in, you looked cross.
And that made you begin to dispute with Mr.
You hurt me very much when you look so, Tertius.
Then I am a brute," said Lydgate, caressing her penitently?
"Oh, outdoor things - business.
Was he not making a fool of himself?
Well, for no definite end.
And there were yet other reasons.
Do we not shun the street version of a fine melody?
But this result was questionable.
And what else could he do for Dorothea?
What was his devotion worth to her?
It was impossible to tell?
He would not go out of her reach.
This had always been the conclusion of Will's hesitations.
But he was not without contradictoriness and rebellion even towards his own resolve.
"That will be a virtual defiance of Mr.
Casaubon's prohibition to visit Lowick, and Dorothea will be displeased.
And Dorothea will be glad.
"It will be clear to Mr.
Casaubon that you have come either to annoy him or to see Dorothea.
Is he to have everything to himself and be always comfortable?
Let him smart a little, as other people are obliged to do?
But he was still left alone in it when the congregation had assembled.
Two minutes later, when Mr.
It was no longer amusing to vex Mr.
Why had he not imagined this beforehand?
It was the fashion at Lowick for "the betters" to go out first.
The lights were all changed for him both without and within.
He had probably imagined, as she had, that if Mr.
But now Dorothea felt quite robbed of that hope.
Will was banished further than ever, for Mr.
Casaubon, to her old companion Pascal, and Keble's "Christian Year.
" But to-day opened one after another, and could read none of them.
Books were of no use.
Thinking was of no use.
After dinner, at the hour when she usually began to read aloud, Mr.
He seemed to have revived, and to be thinking intently.
It is not wearisome to you, I trust, Dorothea?
The reading in the night did come.
" she said, rising immediately?
"I felt some uneasiness in a reclining posture.
I will sit here for a time.
"You would oblige me greatly by doing so, Dorothea," said Mr.
Casaubon, with a shade more meekness than usual in his polite manner.
"I am wakeful: my mind is remarkably lucid.
"No, I am not conscious of undue excitement.
At last he said -.
"Close the book now, my dear.
We will resume our work to-morrow.
I have deferred it too long, and would gladly see it completed.
You have perceived that distinctly, Dorothea?
"Yes," said Dorothea, rather tremulously.
She felt sick at heart.
"And now I think that I can take some repose," said Mr.
He laid down again and begged her to put out the lights.
"Before I sleep, I have a request to make, Dorothea.
" said Dorothea, with dread in her mind?
She did not answer immediately.
Casaubon, with more edge in his tone.
Whatever affection prompted I would do without promising.
"No, dear, no!" said Dorothea, beseechingly, crushed by opposing fears.
"But may I wait and reflect a little while?
"You cannot then confide in the nature of my wishes?
"Grant me till to-morrow," said Dorothea, beseechingly.
"Till to-morrow then," said Mr.
And yet, could she deny him?
Could she say, "I refuse to content this pining hunger?
"Was I ever high-colored, Tantripp?
" said Dorothea, smiling faintly?
"Well, not to say high-colored, but with a bloom like a Chiny rose.
But always smelling those leather books, what can be expected?
Do rest a little this morning, madam?
"Oh no, no! let me make haste," said Dorothea.
As Dorothea entered the library, Mr.
"I was waiting for your appearance, my dear.
"I am glad to hear that," said Dorothea.
"Your mind, I feared, was too active last night.
You can now, I hope, give me an answer.
"May I come out to you in the garden presently?
" said Dorothea, winning a little breathing space in that way?
"I shall be in the Yew-tree Walk for the next half-hour," said Mr.
Casaubon, and then he left her.
Dorothea, feeling very weary, rang and asked Tantripp to bring her some wraps.
Casaubon anything but "your master," when speaking to the other servants.
He liked his master very well, but he liked Tantripp better.
If that were weakness, Dorothea was weak.
But the half-hour was passing, and she must not delay longer.
He took no notice, and she thought that he must be fast asleep.
"Wake, dear, wake! Listen to me.
I am come to answer.
" But Dorothea never gave her answer.
"Tell him I shall go to him soon: I am ready to promise.
Only, thinking about it was so dreadful - it has made me ill.
I shall soon be better.
But the silence in her husband's ear was never more to be broken.
It was the day after Mr.
She has her notions, you know," said Mr.
And she was twenty-one last December, you know.
Brooke, saying, "I will tell you what we can do.
" Here Sir James's look of disgust returned in all its intensity.
"That is easily said, Chettam, easily said, you know.
Ladislaw has been invaluable, most satisfactory.
Brooke ended with a nod, turning round to give it.
Sir James was getting warm.
"Of course, my dear Chettam, of course.
But you and I have different ideas - different - ".
"Not about this action of Casaubon's, I should hope," interrupted Sir James.
"I say that he has most unfairly compromised Dorothea.
"Well, you know, Casaubon was a little twisted about Ladislaw.
I saw the letters between them, you know.
Poor Casaubon was a little buried in books-he didn't know the world.
"My dear Chettam, it won't lead to anything, you know," said Mr.
Brooke, seating himself and sticking on his eyeglass again.
"It's all of a piece with Casaubon's oddity.
This paper, now, `Synoptical Tabulation' and so on, `for the use of Mrs.
Casaubon,' it was locked up in the desk with the will.
I suppose he meant Dorothea to publish his researches, eh?
and she'll do it, you know; she has gone into his studies uncommonly?
"My dear sir," said Sir James, impatiently, "that is neither here nor there.
"Well, no, not the urgency of the thing.
By-and-by, perhaps, it may come round.
As to gossip, you know, sending him away won't hinder gossip.
As you say, she had better go to Celia as soon as possible.
Don't let us be firing off our guns in a hurry, you know.
Twenty things may happen to carry off Ladislaw-without my doing anything, you know.
"Then I am to conclude that you decline to do anything?
- no - I didn't say decline?
But I really don't see what I could do.
"I am sure Casaubon was not.
"I don't know that," said Sir James.
"It would have been less indelicate.
"One of poor Casaubon's freaks! That attack upset his brain a little.
It all goes for nothing.
She doesn't WANT to marry Ladislaw.
I tell you frankly, I suspect Ladislaw.
"I couldn't take any immediate action on that ground, Chettam.
It would seem as if we distrusted her-distrusted her, you know.
I shall do what I can, as her brother, to protect her now.
I approve that plan altogether," said Mr.
Brooke, well pleased that he had won the argument.
There may be something that would throw light on his wishes.
"No hurry, my dear," said Mr.
"By-and-by, you know, you can go, if you like.
Everything can be done by-and-by.
Casaubon has not left any expression of his wishes.
"Nothing about the rectory, my dear - nothing," said Mr.
"Come, you must not think of these things yet, my dear.
"I am quite well now, uncle; I wish to exert myself.
"Well, well, we shall see.
Brooke's) fault if Dorothea insisted on looking into everything.
"Look, Dodo! look at him! Did you ever see anything like that?
" said Celia, in her comfortable staccato?
" said Dorothea, lifting her eyes rather absently?
Isn't it wonderful! He may have his little thoughts.
I wish nurse were here.
"Don't be sad, Dodo; kiss baby.
What are you brooding over so?
I am sure you did everything, and a great deal too much?
You should be happy now.
"I wonder if Sir James would drive me to Lowick.
"You are not to go till Mr.
Lydgate says you may go.
"Where am I wrong, Kitty?
" said Dorothea, quite meekly?
Celia felt her advantage, and was determined to use it.
As if you had not been uncomfortable enough before.
And he doesn't deserve it, and you will find that out.
He has behaved very badly.
James is as angry with him as can be.
And I had better tell you, to prepare you.
"Celia," said Dorothea, entreatingly, "you distress me.
Tell me at once what you mean.
" It glanced through her mind that' Mr.
"That is of no consequence," said Dorothea, breaking in impetuously.
"But if you married Mr.
Ladislaw, not anybody else," Celia went on with persevering quietude.
Ladislaw; but that only makes it worse of Mr.
The blood rushed to Dorothea's face and neck painfully.
But Celia was administering what she thought a sobering dose of fact.
It was taking up notions that had done Dodo's health so much harm.
He says it is abominable, and not like a gentleman.
And there never was a better judge than James.
It is as if Mr.
Casaubon wanted to make people believe that you would wish to marry Mr.
Ladislaw - which is ridiculous.
Only James says it was to hinder Mr.
You can go to lunch, and let Garratt stay in the next room.
I never did like him, and James never did.
I think the corners of his mouth were dreadfully spiteful.
We should not grieve, should we, baby?
Casaubon; have you been agitated?
allow me to feel your pulse?
" Dorothea's hand was of a marble coldness.
"She wants to go to Lowick, to look over papers," said Celia.
"She ought not, ought she?
Lydgate did not speak for a few moments.
Then he said, looking at Dorothea.
Casaubon should do what would give her the most repose of mind.
That repose will not always come from being forbidden to act.
"Thank you;" said Dorothea, exerting herself, "I am sure that is wise.
There are so many things which I ought to attend to.
Why should I sit here idle?
I shall ask you to tell me a great deal.
I have serious things to do now.
I have a living to give away.
Lydgate made her drink a dose of sal volatile.
"She wants perfect freedom, I think, more than any other prescription.
I am much happier at Freshitt with Celia.
Why should he be compared with an Italian carrying white mice?
That word quoted from Mrs?
The grasp had slipped away.
"Instead of telling you anything about Mr.
Tyke," he said, "I should like to speak of another man-Mr.
Farebrother, the Vicar of St.
His mother, aunt, and sister all live with him, and depend upon him.
I believe he has never married because of them.
I never heard such good preaching as his - such plain, easy eloquence.
He would have done to preach at St.
Paul's Cross after old Latimer.
His talk is just as good about all subjects: original, simple, clear.
"Why has he not done more?
"That's a hard question," said Lydgate.
He does play for money, and he wins a good deal.
"My uncle says that Mr.
Tyke is spoken of as an apostolic man," said Dorothea, meditatively.
Farebrother with a strong desire to rescue him from his chance-gotten money.
"I don't pretend to say that Farebrother is apostolic," said Lydgate.
I see something of that in Mr.
Besides, an apostolic man at Lowick! - he ought to think, as St.
Francis did, that it is needful to preach to the birds.
I have been looking into a volume of sermons by Mr.
It is surely better to pardon too much, than to condemn too much.
But I should like to see Mr.
Farebrother and hear him preach.
"Do," said Lydgate; "I trust to the effect of that.
And that money-winning business is really a blot.
You don't, of course, see many Middlemarch people: but Mr.
Ladislaw, who is constantly seeing Mr.
Brooke, is a great friend of Mr.
Farebrother's old ladies, and would be glad to sing the Vicar's praises.
But the best evidence about Farebrother is to see him and hear him.
Brooke's confidential secretary was a dangerous subject with Mrs.
What was Will Ladislaw thinking about her?
And how would he feel when he heard it?
"Why should you bring me into the matter?
Casaubon, and am not likely to see her, since she is at Freshitt.
This was a shuffling concession of Mr.
Her friends, then, regarded him with some suspicion?
"We are forever divided," said Will.
The latter means, of course, would be preferable.
This prospect of converting votes was a dangerous distraction to Mr.
"You know there are tactics in these things," said Mr.
These ten-pound householders, now: why ten?
Draw the line somewhere - yes: but why just at ten?
That's a difficult question, now, if you go into it?
"Of course it is," said Will, impatiently.
As for trimming, this is not a time for trimming.
He was a little conscious of defeat, however, with Mr.
He was accustomed to receive large orders from Mr.
I put the question FICTIOUSLY, knowing what must be the answer?
I don't mean by your honorable self, Mr.
"No, no, no - that's narrow, you know.
Until my butler complains to me of your goods, Mr.
"Sir, I am your humble servant, and greatly obliged," said Mr.
Mawmsey, feeling that politics were clearing up a little.
We're all one family, you know-it's all one cupboard.
Mawmsey answered in a tone of decisive check.
"I beg your pardon, sir, but I can't afford that.
Brooke through would be quite innocent.
No! the only way in which Mr.
Standish as a Liberal lawyer, and such manufacturers as Mr.
Vincy, gave a solidity which almost counterbalanced Mr.
Hawley and his associates who sat for Pinkerton at the Green Dragon.
Brooke as the crowd gathered.
"I shall have a good audience, at any rate.
The weavers and tanners of Middlemarch, unlike Mr.
Mawmsey, had never thought of Mr.
It was ill-chosen; for Mr.
It was not about the beginning of his speech that Mr.
- Ladislaw," he continued, aloud, "just hand me the memorandum of the schedules.
He began with some confidence.
"Gentlemen - Electors of Middlemarch!".
Plying among his recollections in this way, Mr.
Immediately the invisible Punch, who had hitherto followed Mr.
Brooke, repeated, "Blast your ideas! we want the Bill.
" The laugh was louder than ever, and for the first time Mr.
Brooke being himself silent, heard distinctly the mocking echo.
The Bill, now - you shall have the Bill" - here Mr?
The invisible Punch followed: -.
"You shall have the Bill, Mr.
The next moment he saw it dolorously bespattered with eggs.
His spirit rose a little, and his voice too.
Brooke, disagreeably anointed, stood his ground no longer.
"However, things will come all right at the nomination.
"It was Bowyer who did it," said Mr.
"I know it as well as if he had been advertised.
Hence he must keep his post and bear with Mr.
But he soon had reason to suspect that Mr.
Brooke had anticipated him in the wish to break up their connection.
Poor Casaubon was a warning, you know.
I've made some heavy advances, but I've dug a channel.
It's rather coarse work - this electioneering, eh, Ladislaw?
dare say you are tired of it?
"Do you wish me to give it up?
"I am ready to do so whenever you wish it.
I think of having a run into France.
"I am exceedingly obliged to you," said Ladislaw, proudly.
I may choose to continue here for the present.
I shall stay as long as I like.
On that June evening when Mr.
"The greatest comfort, Camden, is that you have deserved it.
But who is in love with me?
"What do you say, mother?
"I wish you would marry Miss Garth, brother," said Miss Winifred.
"She would make us so lively at Lowick.
"We don't want everybody," said Miss Winifred.
"But YOU would like Miss Garth, mother, shouldn't you?
"My son's choice shall be mine," said Mrs.
Farebrother, with majestic discretion, "and a wife would be most welcome, Camden.
Farebrother always called her tiny old sister by that magnificent name.
"I shall do without whist now, mother.
"I have thought of that," said Dorothea.
"I am ashamed to trouble you, Mr.
He said it was too late.
But you have got over one bridge now: what are your other difficulties?
"Merely that I don't like it.
I don't like divinity, and preaching, and feeling obliged to look serious.
I like riding across country, and doing as other men do.
And yet what else am I to do?
My father can't spare me any capital, else I might go into farming?
And he has no room for me in his trade.
Fred's voice had taken a tone of grumbling remonstrance, and Mr.
"Have you any difficulties about doctrines - about the Articles?
"No; I suppose the Articles are right.
Do you think any body ought to blame me?
"For going into the Church under the circumstances?
"But there is another hindrance," said Fred, coloring.
" said the Vicar, examining some labels very closely?
I shouldn't mind anything if she would have me.
And I know I could be a good fellow then.
"And you think she returns the feeling?
But I can't give her up.
I do think she cares about me.
"Yes, she is very kindly helping my sister.
Do you wish to go there?
"No, I want to ask a great favor of you.
"That is rather a delicate task, my dear Fred.
"That is what I want her to tell you," said Fred, bluntly.
"I don't know what to do, unless I can get at her feeling.
Men outlive their love, but they don't outlive the consequences of their recklessness.
"Not my sort of love: I have never been without loving Mary.
"Will she not be hurt at my intrusion?
"No, I feel sure she will not.
She ought to believe that I would exert myself for her sake.
There was a moment's silence before Mr.
I will do what you wish.
She did not observe Mr.
Mary started up and blushed.
"It always answers to reason with Fly," she said, laughingly.
"But not with young gentlemen?
"Oh, with some, I suppose; since some of them turn into excellent men.
I hope you know by those marks what young gentleman I mean.
"He has asked me to consult you about his going into the Church.
Farebrother paused a moment and looked at Mary.
Mary's cheeks had begun to burn a little, and she was mute.
"I mean, that your action made no real difference to Fred's lot.
So, on that score, you may feel your mind free.
"I am grateful to you for remembering my feelings.
"Well, now I may go on.
Fred, you know, has taken his degree.
The condition lies entirely in your feeling.
"I cannot possibly say that I will ever be his wife, Mr.
"He wishes me to report exactly what you think," said Mr.
I used to think that of Mr.
Crowse, with his empty face and neat umbrella, and mincing little speeches.
But you don't put Fred Vincy on so low a level as that?
He would be a piece of professional affectation.
"Then the answer is quite decided.
As a clergyman he could have no hope?
May he count on winning you?
Mary in her turn was silent, wondering not at Mr.
Farebrother, the cleverest man in her narrow circle.
"Since you think it my duty, Mr.
I cannot imagine any new feeling coming to make that weaker.
He is free to choose some one else.
"Then I have fulfilled my commission thoroughly," said Mr.
"Oh, please stay, and let me give you some tea," said Mary.
It was not that Mr.
Rigg Featherstone would have clung to it as the Garden of Eden.
Farebrother's induction to the living clearly was.
This was not what Mr.
However, whether for sanction or for chastisement, Mr.
And he would willingly have had that service of exhortation in prospect now.
"Bless my heart! what's this fellow in black coming along the lane?
He's like one of those men one sees about after the races?
Bulstrode turned his horse and looked along the lane, but made no reply.
The comer was our slight acquaintance Mr.
Bulstrode, and at last exclaiming: -.
you didn't expect to see ME here?
Come, shake us by the hand.
" To say that Mr.
"I did not indeed expect to see you in this remote country place.
"I came to see him here before.
He now spurred his horse, and saying, "I wish you good evening, Mr.
Bulstrode; I must be getting home," set off at a trot.
"You didn't put your full address to this letter," Raffles continued.
"That was not like the first-rate man of business you used to be.
`The Shrubs,' - they may be anywhere: you live near at hand, eh?
But, by Jove! you're very pale and pasty, Nick?
Come, if you're going home, I'll walk by your side.
Bulstrode's usual paleness had in fact taken an almost deathly hue.
And you can, if you please, rest here.
"Thank you," said Raffles, making a grimace.
"I don't care now about seeing my stepson.
I'd rather go home with you.
Rigg Featherstone was he, is here no longer.
I am master here now.
I've had enough walking from the coach-road.
I never was much of a walker, or rider either.
What I like is a smart vehicle and a spirited cob.
I was always a little heavy in the saddle.
"If I remember rightly," Mr.
"You don't like being called Nick?
By Jove! my feelings have ripened for you like fine old cognac.
I hope you've got some in the house now.
Josh filled my flask well the last time.
But it was at least clear that further objection was useless, and Mr.
Bulstrode entertained Raffles merely as a friend of her former master.
"Your habits and mine are so different, Mr.
Raffles, that we can hardly enjoy each other's society.
The spirit of evil might have sent him to threaten Mr.
For who would understand the work within him?
In his closest meditations the life-long habit of Mr.
Bulstrode's mind clad his most egoistic terrors in doctrinal references to superhuman ends.
Bulstrode had aimed at being an eminent Christian.
Raffles, with whom he was condemned to breakfast.
Certainly his manners seemed more disagreeable by the morning light.
"As I have little time to spare, Mr.
Aren't you glad to see me again?
I expected an invite to stay with you at some pretty place?
My own establishment is broken up now my wife's dead.
"May I ask why you returned from America?
And I'm not going again, Nick.
Raffles winked slowly as he looked at Mr.
"Do you wish to be settled in any business?
What is your calling now?
"Thank you, my calling is to enjoy myself as much as I can.
I don't care about working any more.
But not without an independence to fall back upon.
Bulstrode, perhaps with a little too much eagerness in his undertone.
"That must be as it suits my convenience," said Raffles coolly.
"I see no reason why I shouldn't make a few acquaintances hereabout.
I'm not ashamed of myself as company for anybody.
"If you intend to rely on me in any way, Mr.
"Ah, to be sure," said Raffles, with a mocking cordiality.
"Didn't I always do it?
You've taken to being a nob, buying land, being a country bashaw.
Still in the Dissenting line, eh?
Or taken to the Church as more genteel?
The man would soon show himself disreputable enough to make people disbelieve him.
"But not when he tells any ugly-looking truth about YOU," said discerning consciousness.
Bulstrode shrank from the direct falsehood of denying true statements.
Josh and I never hit it off.
I've got a complaint that makes me a little dilatory.
"You will do well to reflect, Mr.
It is in your power to choose.
I shall decline to know you.
"You can't understand a joke, my good fellow.
I only meant that I should never decline to know you.
But let us be serious.
Your quarterly payment won't quite suit me.
But I shall not give up my Liberty for a dirty annuity.
I shall come and go where I like.
Have you the money with you?
"I will forward you the other if you will mention an address.
"No, I'll wait here till you bring it," said Raffles.
But hang it, I lost my pocketbook.
However, if I heard it, I should know it again.
However, if I hear of her and her family, you shall know, Nick.
You'd like to do something for her, now she's your step-daughter.
"But what the deuce was the name?
Raffles there is always probable good in a secret.
"But what should we have been then?
"I like her better as she is.
"What will you do at Lowick, Dodo?
And here you have been so happy going all about Tipton with Mr.
Garth into the worst backyards.
And now uncle is abroad, you and Mr.
I wish to know the Farebrothers better, and to talk to Mr.
Farebrother about what there is to be done in Middlemarch.
Dorothea's native strength of will was no longer all converted into resolute submission.
But every one around her disapproved.
But you must not run into that.
That is a good lowering medicine.
"But I suppose you have found out your mistake, my dear," said Mrs.
Cadwallader, "and that is a proof of sanity.
Dorothea was aware of the sting, but it did not hurt her.
Of course the Chettams would not wish it.
If we were not so poor I would invite Lord Triton.
"My dear Elinor, do let the poor woman alone.
Such contrivances are of no use," said the easy Rector.
How are matches made, except by bringing men and women together?
That would just suit Mrs.
Casaubon choose for herself, Elinor.
A woman's choice usually means taking the only man she can get?
"I have never entered on it," said Mrs Cadwallader, opening her hands.
Dorothea quietly persisted in spite of remonstrance and persuasion.
One little act of hers may perhaps be smiled at as superstitious.
The Synoptical Tabulation for the use of Mrs.
" Then she deposited the paper in her own desk?
The longing was to see Will Ladislaw.
But her soul thirsted to see him.
How could it be otherwise?
Farebrother talked of every one else in the neighborhood and out of it.
Farebrother's Middlemarch hearers may follow him to Lowick sometimes.
Do you not think so?
"If they are wise they will, Mrs.
Casaubon," said the old lady.
"I see that you set a right value on my son's preaching.
They say Fortune is a woman and capricious.
Casaubon, who have given a living to my son.
Her reverie was broken by Tantripp, who came to say that Mr.
"I will see him," said Dorothea, rising immediately.
"Let him be shown into the drawing-room.
Casaubon now she was a rich widow.
"Very sorry to hear it, sir," said Pratt, retiring.
Madam would look higher than Mr.
Ladislaw, else I don't know her.
Neither of them knew how it was, but neither of them spoke.
"Are you going away immediately?
"And that will make it all the more honorable," said Dorothea, ardently.
"Besides, you have so many talents.
And you care that justice should be done to every one.
But now I know you think about the rest of the world.
She looked at Will with a direct glance, full of delighted confidence.
She was not aware how long it was before she answered.
This was not judicious behavior.
"Yes, it must be right for you to do as you say.
But you must have patience.
It will perhaps be a long while.
He sat still, however, and only said -.
"I shall never hear from you.
And you will forget all about me.
"No," said Dorothea, "I shall never forget you.
I have never forgotten any one whom I once knew.
My life has never been crowded, and seems not likely to be so.
But there was no help for it.
It is wonderfully like you.
"You are very good," said Will, irritably.
"No; I don't mind about it.
It is not very consoling to have one's own likeness.
It would be more consoling if others wanted to have it.
But to Dorothea's feeling his words had a peculiar sting.
"You are much the happier of us two, Mr.
Their eyes met, but with a strange questioning gravity.
"I never felt it a misfortune to have nothing till now," he said.
The words cut Dorothea to the heart, and made her relent.
She answered in a tone of sad fellowship.
"Sorrow comes in so many ways.
"Ask Sir James to come in here," said Dorothea, immediately.
"I must say good-by, Mrs.
Casaubon; and probably for a long while.
Dorothea put out her hand and said her good-by cordially.
" that he was obliged to behave as if nothing had annoyed him?
And what would be the use of behaving otherwise?
His aversion was all the stronger because he felt himself unable to interfere.
But Sir James was a power in a way unguessed by himself.
Each crisis seems final, simply because it is new.
For this very reason she dwelt on it without inward check.
Cadwallader came to dine, the Rector being gone on a fishing excursion.
"Dear Dodo, do throw off that cap.
I am sure your dress must make you feel ill.
"I feel rather bare and exposed when it is off.
"It was I who did it, James," said Celia.
"Not if she marries again before the end of it," said Mrs.
Cadwallader, who had some pleasure in startling her good friend the Dowager.
Sir James was annoyed, and leaned forward to play with Celia's Maltese dog.
"No friend of ours ever committed herself in that way except Mrs.
Beevor, and it was very painful to Lord Grinsell when she did so.
Her first husband was objectionable, which made it the greater wonder.
And severely she was punished for it.
"Oh, if she took the wrong man!" said Mrs.
Cadwallader, who was in a decidedly wicked mood.
"Marriage is always bad then, first or second.
I would rather have a good second husband than an indifferent first.
"My dear, your clever tongue runs away with you," said Lady Chettam.
"Oh, I make no vows; it might be a necessary economy.
But if she can marry blood, beauty, and bravery-the sooner the better.
Cadwallader amuse herself on that subject as much as on any other.
It was only an instance that occurred to me.
She was step-daughter to Lord Grinsell: he married Mrs.
Teveroy for his second wife.
There could be no possible allusion to you.
"Nobody chose the subject; it all came out of Dodo's cap.
Cadwallader only said what was quite true.
A woman could not be married in a widow's cap, James.
"Hush, my dear!" said Mrs.
"I will not offend again.
I will not even refer to Dido or Zenobia.
Only what are we to talk about?
Later in the evening, after Mrs.
"Don't be anxious, Kitty; I have quite other thoughts about my life.
"Not anybody at all - if he were very wonderful indeed?
Dorothea shook her head slowly.
I should know every one of the people and be their friend.
I am going to have great consultations with Mr.
Garth: he can tell me almost everything I want to know.
"Then you WILL be happy, if you have a plan, Dodo?
Sir James made no remark.
Casaubon had a head for business most uncommon in a woman.
' Those were the very words: she sees into things in that way.
"But womanly, I hope," said Mrs.
Garth, half suspecting that Mrs.
Casaubon might not hold the true principle of subordination.
"Oh, you can't think!" said Caleb, shaking his head.
"You would like to hear her speak, Susan.
She speaks in such plain words, and a voice like music.
With this good understanding between them, it was natural that Dorothea asked Mr.
As he said, "Business breeds.
But the slower wits, such as Mr.
"The cows will all cast their calves, brother," said Mrs.
What's to hinder 'em from cutting right and left if they begin?
It's well known, I can't fight?
"Folks did that about Brassing, by what I can understand.
Let 'em go cutting in another parish.
"Brother Peter, God forgive him, got money out of a company," said Mrs.
"But that was for the manganese.
That wasn't for railways to blow you to pieces right and left.
"Well, there's this to be said, Jane," Mr.
Thus the mind of Frick was exactly of the sort for Mr.
The hour-hand of a clock was quick by comparison with Mr.
Solomon, who had an agreeable sense that he could afford to be slow.
"Not a bit," said Mr.
But there's no knowing what there is at the bottom of it.
"Well, I wouldn't meddle with 'em myself," said Solomon.
Solomon, shaking his bridle, moved onward.
One morning, not long after that interview between Mr.
"What do you confounded fools mean?
"I'll swear to every one of you before the magistrate.
You've knocked the lad down and killed him, for what I know.
"Yo're a coward, yo are.
Yo daredn't come on wi'out your hoss an' whip.
I'd soon knock the breath out on ye, I would.
"The ground is clear now.
"No, no," said Caleb, "here's a breakage.
They'll have to give up for to-day, and it will be as well.
Here, take the things before you on the horse, Tom.
They'll see you coming, and they'll turn back.
"I'm glad I happened to be here at the right moment, Mr.
Garth," said Fred, as Tom rode away.
I can't get along without somebody to help me with the measuring-chain.
I'll help you with pleasure - can I?
"Well, you mustn't mind stooping and getting hot.
It would be a good lesson for him.
I shall not be five minutes.
"Nonsense!" said Caleb, with his most peremptory intonation.
"I shall go and speak to the men myself.
Somebody has been telling them lies.
The poor fools don't know any better.
"I shall go with you, then," said Fred.
"No, no; stay where you are.
I don't want your young blood.
I can take care of myself.
"Why, my lads, how's this?
"How came you to make such a mistake as this?
Somebody has been telling you lies?
You thought those men up there wanted to do mischief.
And if you go fighting against it, you'll get yourselves into trouble.
The law gives those men leave to come here on the land.
And you might be in for it now, if anybody informed against you.
"But come, you didn't mean any harm.
Somebody told you the railroad was a bad thing.
But the railway's a good thing.
What's the canells been t' him?
Times ha' got wusser for him sin' I war a young un.
An' so it'll be wi' the railroads.
They'll on'y leave the poor mon furder behind.
But them are fools as meddle, and so I told the chaps here.
This is the big folks's world, this is.
But yo're for the big folks, Muster Garth, yo are.
"That war all we war arter.
"I'n ne'er meddled, an' I'n no call to promise," said Timothy.
Say you'll be quiet without the constable.
They went to work, and Fred helped vigorously.
I am not sure that certain fibres in Mr.
But they went on in silence except when their business demanded speech.
At last, when they had finished and were walking away, Mr.
"A young fellow needn't be a B.
to do this sort of work, eh, Fred?
"My business is of many sorts, my boy," said Mr.
But you are young enough to lay a foundation yet.
" Caleb pronounced the last sentence emphatically, but paused in some uncertainty.
" said Fred, more eagerly?
Or, if you ARE easy, you'll be a poor stick.
"That is very nearly what Mary thinks about it," said Fred, coloring.
"I think you must know what I feel for Mary, Mr.
The expression of Caleb's face was visibly softening while Fred spoke.
But he swung his head with a solemn slowness, and said -.
Garth," said Fred, eagerly, "and I would do anything for HER.
I should like to have to do with outdoor things.
I know a good deal about land and cattle already.
"Softly, my boy," said Caleb, having the image of "Susan" before his eyes.
"What have you said to your father about all this?
"Nothing, yet; but I must tell him.
My education was a mistake?
"But hearken to this, Fred," said Caleb.
"Are you sure Mary is fond of you, or would ever have you?
Come to me to-morrow at the office, at nine o'clock.
He never, indeed, chose to be absolute except on some one else's behalf.
"The children ARE fond of each other-I mean, Fred and Mary.
"After we'd done our work, Fred poured it all out to me.
And I've determined to take him and make a man of him.
Garth, in a deep contralto, expressive of resigned astonishment.
"It's a fine thing to do," said Mr.
It shapes many a rough fellow.
"Has Mary spoken to you on the subject?
But she assured me she would never marry an idle self-indulgent man-nothing since.
But it seems Fred set on Mr.
"It is a pity for Mary, I think," said Mrs.
" said Caleb, with surprise?
"I firmly believe that Mr.
" There was a severe precision in Mrs.
Caleb was silent a few moments under a conflict of feelings.
At last he said -.
But you took me, though I was a plain man.
"I took the best and cleverest man I had ever known," said Mrs.
"Well, perhaps others thought you might have done better.
But it would have been worse for me.
And that is what touches me close about Fred.
She wiped it away quickly, saying -.
"That signifies nothing - what other men would think.
Caleb, leaning back in his chair, looked with anxious appeal towards his wife.
"Now Fred," said Caleb, "you will have some desk-work.
So you must buckle to.
How are you at writing and arithmetic?
"I'm not afraid of arithmetic, Mr.
Garth: it always came easily to me.
I think you know my writing.
Bad work like this dispelled all Caleb's mildness.
"The deuce!" he exclaimed, snarlingly.
"What can I do, Mr.
Why, you must learn to form your letters and keep the line?
What's the use of writing at all if nobody can understand it?
" asked Caleb, energetically, quite preoccupied with the bad quality of the work?
But that's the way people are brought up?
" Here Caleb tossed the paper from him.
Fred was struggling with many thoughts.
He did not like to disappoint himself there.
"I am very sorry," were all the words that he could muster.
"Every man can learn to write.
We'll be patient, my boy.
But now I must be off," said Caleb, rising.
"You must let your father know our agreement.
He went straight from Mr.
The regret was genuine, and inspired Fred with strong, simple words.
Vincy replaced a book in his desk and turned the key emphatically.
Then he looked at his son steadily, and said -.
"So you've made up your mind at last, sir?
"Very well; stick to it.
I've no more to say.
"I am very sorry that we differ, father.
"Very well; I have no more to say.
I wash my hands of you.
This was very cutting to Fred.
"I hope you will not object to my remaining at home, sir?
"Board be hanged!" said Mr.
"Of course your mother will want you to stay.
Fred lingered; there was still something to be said.
It was the end of the fourth day when Mr.
Vincy said to her -.
"Come, Lucy, my dear, don't be so down-hearted.
You always have spoiled the boy, and you must go on spoiling him.
"Pooh, pooh, never mind! We must expect to have trouble with our children.
Don't make it worse by letting me see you out of spirits.
"Well, I won't," said Mrs.
"It won't do to begin making a fuss about one," said Mr.
Vincy, wishing to combine a little grumbling with domestic cheerfulness.
"There's Rosamond as well as Fred.
But they'll get no money from me, I know.
Let HIS family help him.
I never did like that marriage.
But it's no use talking.
Ring the bell for lemons, and don't look dull any more, Lucy.
I'll drive you and Louisa to Riverston to-morrow.
It was a festival with Mrs.
"Oh, and me too," said Letty.
"You can't keep up with Fred and me," said Ben.
"Let us all go and see Mary," said Christy, opening his arms.
And that old Glasgow suit of yours would never do.
Besides, your father will come home.
We must let Fred go alone.
"Children, run away," said Mrs.
Garth; "it is too warm to hang about your friends.
Take your brother and show him the rabbits.
The eldest understood, and led off the children immediately.
"How glad you must be to have Christy here!".
"Yes; he has come sooner than I expected.
He hopes soon to get a private tutorship and go abroad.
"I know you think me very undeserving, Mrs.
But while two men like Mr.
"Assuredly," said she, with gathering emphasis.
Garth, since I have some encouragement to believe that I may win Mary.
Garth has told you about that?
You were not surprised, I dare say?
"Not surprised that Mary has given you encouragement?
"Yes, I confess I was surprised.
"But when I asked Mr.
The power of admonition which had begun to stir in Mrs.
Garth had not yet discharged itself.
Exemplary wives will sometimes find scapegoats in this way.
Farebrother to speak for you.
" said Fred, reddening instantaneously?
He was alarmed, but at a loss to know what Mrs.
Garth meant, and added, in an apologetic tone, "Mr.
"I cannot conceive how it could be any pain to Mr.
"Precisely; you cannot conceive," said Mrs.
Garth, cutting her words as neatly as possible.
"Do you mean to say, Mrs.
Farebrother is in love with Mary?
Garth, laying her knitting down beside her and folding her arms.
Fred took his hat and stick and rose quickly.
"Then you think I am standing in his way, and in Mary's too?
" he said, in a tone which seemed to demand an answer?
Garth could not speak immediately.
And to her the consciousness of having exceeded in words was peculiarly mortifying.
Besides, Fred had given out unexpected electricity, and he now added, "Mr.
Garth seemed pleased that Mary should be attached to me.
He could not have known anything of this.
She answered, wanting to check unintended consequences -.
"I spoke from inference only.
I am not aware that Mary knows anything of the matter.
He got away as soon as he could, and Mrs.
Notwithstanding his trust in Mr.
But the fighting with Mr.
It did not once occur to Fred that Mrs.
Garth might be mistaken about Mr.
Farebrother, but he suspected that she might be wrong about Mary.
But here was a subject which Mrs.
Farebrother could not let pass.
"I have a dreadfully secular mind.
I never liked any clergyman except the Vicar of Wakefield and Mr.
Farebrother, pausing on her large wooden knitting-needles and looking at Mary.
"You have always a good reason for your opinions, but this astonishes me.
Of course I put out of the question those who preach new doctrine.
But why should you dislike clergymen?
"Why, you don't like Camden's, then," said Miss Winifred, in some anxiety.
"Yes, I do," said Mary.
"My dear, you are joking.
Mary was wondering at Fred's piqued tone, when Mr.
Fred felt horribly jealous - was glad, of course, that Mr.
Pray come too, Miss Garth.
I want you to see a stupendous spider I found this morning.
Mary at once saw the Vicar's intention.
"Wait here a minute or two.
I shall be back in a few minutes.
" And then he went out.
Nevertheless, the first word Fred said to Mary was -.
"It is of no use, whatever I do, Mary.
You are sure to marry Farebrother at last.
" There was some rage in his tone.
"What do you mean, Fred?
Farebrother after he has pleaded your cause in every way.
How can you have taken up such an idea?
Fred was rather deep, in spite of his irritation.
"It follows as a matter of course," he replied.
"You are very ungrateful, Fred," said Mary.
"I wish I had never told Mr.
Farebrother that I cared for you in the least.
"This dreadful certainty that I shall be bowled out by Farebrother.
" Mary was appeased by her inclination to laugh.
"Do you really like me best, Mary?
"I only said that no mortal ever made love to me besides you.
I am disappointed that you should be so blind to his delicate feeling.
There was no time to say any more before Mr.
At the time when Mr.
Especially as, probably at the Captain's suggestion, his married sister, Mrs.
Ladislaw has almost forsaken the house since he came.
Rosamond thought she knew perfectly well why Mr.
Ladislaw disliked the Captain: he was jealous, and she liked his being jealous.
"No, dear; but we have had dinners for him.
And he comes in and goes out as he likes.
"Still, when he is in the room, you might show him more attention.
I think his conversation is quite agreeable.
And he is anything but an unprincipled man.
Rosamond found it quite agreeable and caught many of its phrases.
"You will not go again, Rosy; that is understood.
"But there is the chance of accident indoors, Tertius.
Lydgate was still angry, and had not forgotten his point.
"It will be treating me as if I were a child.
Promise that you will leave the subject to me.
There did seem to be some truth in her objection.
In fact, she had been determined not to promise.
Rosamond had that victorious obstinacy which never wastes its energy in impetuous resistance.
There was gathering within him an amazed sense of his powerlessness over Rosamond.
But the check had come.
Its novelty made it the more irritating.
He had scorned even to form conjectures about Mr.
How could such a change be made without Rosamond's concurrence?
Dover's stock, though he shrank from the idea of proposing this to Rosamond.
It was evening when he got home.
He was intensely miserable, this strong man of nine-and-twenty and of many gifts.
Of course, Ladislaw was there.
" said Will, coming forward to shake hands?
Lydgate took his hand, but did not think it necessary to speak.
" She seated herself in her usual place as she spoke.
Will was too quick to need more.
"I shall be off," he said, reaching his hat.
"Tea is coming," said Rosamond; "pray don't go.
"Yes, Rosamond, I shall," said Lydgate, in his strong baritone.
"I have some serious business to speak to you about.
"There! you see," said Will.
"I'm going to the meeting about the Mechanics' Institute.
Good-by;" and he went quickly out of the room.
She was thinking that she had never seen him so disagreeable.
" and then, "It is the way with all women?
He minds about nothing else - and I mind about nothing else.
Her impression now was one of offence and repulsion.
He laid his ample hand softly on hers, saying -.
"Dear!" with the lingering utterance which affection gives to the word.
"I am obliged to tell you what will hurt you, Rosy.
But there are things which husband and wife must think of together.
"What can - I - do, Tertius?
" said Rosamond, turning her eyes on him again?
They fell like a mortal chill on Lydgate's roused tenderness.
"Have you not asked papa for money?
" she said, as soon as she could speak?
"No, Rosy," said Lydgate, decisively.
"It is too late to do that.
The inventory will be begun to-morrow.
"Try not to grieve, darling," said Lydgate, turning his eyes up towards her.
"We must brace ourselves to do what is necessary.
"Why can you not put off having the inventory made?
You can send the men away to-morrow when they come?
"I shall not send them away," said Lydgate, the peremptoriness rising again.
Was it of any use to explain?
there would of course be a sale, and that would do as well?
"But we are not going to leave Middlemarch.
"I am sure, Tertius, it would be much better to do so.
Why can we not go to London?
Or near Durham, where your family is known?
"We can go nowhere without money, Rosamond.
"Your friends would not wish you to be without money.
"This is idle Rosamond," said Lydgate, angrily.
"You must learn to take my judgment on questions you don't understand.
I have made necessary arrangements, and they must be carried out.
"There are some details that I want to consider with you.
He really behaves very well.
"Are we to go without spoons and forks then?
She was determined to make no further resistance or suggestions.
"Oh no, dear!" said Lydgate.
I have not marked any of the jewellery.
Meanwhile Rosamond quietly went out of the room, leaving Lydgate helpless and wondering.
Was she not coming back?
There was still science-there were still good objects to work for.
He must give a tug still-all the stronger because other satisfactions were going.
But the door opened and Rosamond re-entered.
"This is all the jewellery you ever gave me.
You can return what you like of it, and of the plate also.
You will not, of course, expect me to stay at home to-morrow.
I shall go to papa's.
"And when shall you come back again?
" he said, with a bitter edge on his accent?
Of course I shall not mention the subject to mamma.
"Certainly not," said Rosamond; "I shall do everything it becomes me to do.
I understand your shrinking from the humiliation of these money affairs.
"I shall not touch these jewels, Rosy.
"The servants will know THAT," said Rosamond, with the slightest touch of sarcasm.
"Well, we must meet some disagreeables as necessities.
Where is the ink, I wonder?
"Come, darling, let us make the best of things.
Casaubon's strange mention of Mr.
Ladislaw in a codicil to his will made not long before his death.
Ladislaw at Lowick, and Miss Noble made many small compassionate mewings.
He remembered Will's irritability when he had mentioned Mrs.
Casaubon, and was the more circumspect.
He is likely to fly out as if you insulted him.
Of course it is a painful affair.
"I know all about it.
"There is a powerful magnet in this neighborhood.
"To be sure there is.
"It is really the most charming romance: Mr.
Casaubon jealous, and foreseeing that there was no one else whom Mrs.
"Great God! what do you mean?
"Don't joke; tell me what you mean.
Casaubon has left it in his will that if Mrs.
Casaubon marries you she is to forfeit all her property?
"How do you know that it is true?
"My brother Fred heard it from the Farebrothers.
" Will started up from his chair and reached his hat.
"It is a foul insult to her and to me.
" Then he sat down absently, looking before him, but seeing nothing.
"Now you are angry with ME," said Rosamond.
"It is too bad to bear ME malice.
You ought to be obliged to me for telling you.
"I expect to hear of the marriage," said Rosamond, playfully.
"Never! You will never hear of the marriage!".
Larcher was nervous until reassured by finding the subjects to be Scriptural.
Bulstrode's retired residence, known as the Shrubs.
Thesiger, the rector of St.
"Everybody" that day did not include Mr.
Bulstrode, whose health could not well endure crowds and draughts.
" At the present moment, however, when Mr.
Trumbull, who was enjoying the utmost activity of his great faculties.
Larcher's drawing-room furniture was enough for him.
"Now, ladies," said he, "I shall appeal to you.
"It's not a thing I would put in MY drawing-room," said Mrs.
Mawmsey, audibly, for the warning of the rash husband.
Every blessed child's head that fell against it would be cut in two.
The edge is like a knife.
Clintup, laughing low and apologetically to his next neighbor.
Meanwhile Joseph had brought a trayful of small articles.
This ingenious article itself, without the elegant domino-box, card-basket, &c.
, ought alone to give a high price to the lot.
Carried in the pocket it might make an individual welcome in any society.
- four shillings for this remarkable collection of riddles with the et caeteras?
- lady-birds - honey money?
The bidding ran on with warming rivalry.
Bowyer was a bidder, and this was too exasperating.
The current carried even Mr.
The lot was finally knocked down at a guinea to Mr.
Toller, getting close to the auctioneer.
It was only an act of benevolence which your noble heart would approve.
Joseph! quick with the prints-Lot 235.
Now, gentlemen, you who are connoissURES, you are going to have a treat.
"It is a proof before the letter, Mr.
"I'll bid a pound!" said Mr.
Whether from awe or pity, nobody raised the price on him.
Next came two Dutch prints which Mr.
It was this marquee that Mr.
"Who is it you've picked up, Bam?
"Ask him yourself," returned Mr.
"He said he'd just turned in from the road.
But Will was immediately appealed to by Mr.
Ladislaw, yes; this interests you as a connoissURE, I think.
Turn it a little, sir?
Joseph, turn it a little towards Mr.
Ladislaw, having been abroad, understands the merit of these things, you observe.
" The auctioneer burst out in deep remonstrance.
Ladislaw! the frame alone is worth that.
Five guineas - five seven-six-five ten.
But this signified little to our acquaintance Mr.
Ladislaw-was your mother's name Sarah Dunkirk?
And what is that to you?
To have said, "What is that to you?
Raffles's pleasure in annoying his company was kept in abeyance.
But it is your father that you feature, sir.
I had the pleasure of seeing your father too.
"No!" thundered Will, in the same attitude as before.
"Should be glad to do you a service, Mr.
Ladislaw - by Jove, I should! Hope to meet again.
"I've been abroad myself, Mr.
Ladislaw - I've seen the world-used to parley-vous a little.
John Bull doesn't do much of that.
But your father was very ill when I saw him.
Lord, lord! hands you might see through.
You were a small youngster then.
"Ah! Well! I've often wondered what became of your mother.
Raffles just now was not sensitive to shades of manner.
Slap-up shop, high profits and no mistake.
And so she ran away from the whole concern.
The son was alive then, and the daughter was at a discount.
Hallo! here we are at the Blue Bull.
What do you say, Mr.
- shall we turn in and have a glass?
His mother had braved hardship in order to separate herself from it?
The same night, when Mr.
"What kind of man, my dear," said Mr.
Bulstrode, dreadfully certain of the answer.
"A red-faced man with large whiskers, and most impudent in his manner.
' Do you really know anything of such a man?
"I believe I know who he is, my dear," said Mr.
However, I presume you will not be troubled by him again.
He will probably come to the Bank-to beg, doubtless.
No more was said on the subject until the next day, when Mr.
Bulstrode had returned from the town and was dressing for dinner.
He started nervously and looked up as she entered.
"You look very ill, Nicholas.
Is there anything the matter?
"I have a good deal of pain in my head," said Mr.
"Sit down and let me sponge it with vinegar.
Bulstrode did not want the vinegar, but morally the affectionate attention soothed him.
"Did that man come to you at the Bank?
"Yes; it was as I had supposed.
He is a man who at one time might have done better.
But he has sunk into a drunken debauched creature.
"Is he quite gone away?
Not that she knew much about them.
Bulstrode was convinced that to be saved in the Church was more respectable.
"Is he quite gone away?
Bulstrode was very far from a state of quiet trust.
By-and-by he might come back for a longer stay.
He meant to go by coach the next day - if he chose.
And that certainty was a terror.
Dunkirk, the richest man in the congregation.
He remembered his first moments of shrinking.
Was it not even God's way of saving His chosen?
But the train of causes in which he had locked himself went on.
There was trouble in the fine villa at Highbury.
Efforts to find her must be made before Mrs.
There, he thought, lay an opening towards spiritual, perhaps towards material rescue.
The spiritual kind of rescue was a genuine need with him.
Who would use money and position better than he meant to use them?
Who could surpass him in self-abhorrence and exaltation of God's cause?
He had long poured out utterances of repentance.
" when, checking himself in that abruptness, he only inquired after Mrs?
Bulstrode, and her satisfaction with the picture bought for her.
I begged you to come, Mr.
Will felt something like an electric shock.
He answered, with a marked change of color -.
"You see before you, Mr.
Ladislaw, a man who is deeply stricken.
So far as human laws go, you have no claim on me whatever.
Will was even more uncomfortable than wondering.
But he now fixed his examining glance on Will and said -.
Also, that your father was at one time much emaciated by illness.
May I ask if you can confirm these statements?
"Do you know any particulars of your mother's family?
"No; she never liked to speak of them.
She was a very generous, honorable woman," said Will, almost angrily.
"I do not wish to allege anything against her.
Did she never mention her mother to you at all?
She said `poor mother' in a pitying tone.
That daughter, I gather, is no longer living!".
The impulse within him was to reject the disclosed connection.
"Doubtless you are startled by the suddenness of this discovery.
"It is my wish, Mr.
Ladislaw, to make amends for the deprivation which befell your mother.
Will made no answer for several moments, till Mr.
Bulstrode shrank - there was a visible quivering in his face and hands.
You enter, I trust, into my purpose, Mr.
He was not in the least touched, and said firmly, -.
"Before I make any reply to your proposition, Mr.
Bulstrode, I must beg you to answer a question or two.
Bulstrode's thought was, "Raffles has told him.
Bulstrode reddened with irrepressible anger.
My unblemished honor is important to me.
And now I find there is a stain which I can't help.
You shall keep your ill-gotten money.
It ought to lie with a man's self that he is a gentleman.
Rut the relief of weeping had to be checked.
Ladislaw felt the awkwardness of asking for more last words.
But Dorothea on that morning was not at home to receive Will's note.
Standish, who was necessarily in his confidence on this matter.
Dorothea was detained on the good pretext that Mr.
"Enough! I understand," - said Mrs.
I am such a blackamoor that I cannot smirch myself.
Cadwallader should understand too much.
It will come lightly from you.
It came very lightly indeed.
When Dorothea quitted Caleb and turned to meet them, it appeared that Mrs.
Brooke's protege, the brilliant young Ladislaw, was gone or going.
Had Sir James heard that?
Lydgate's wife, who they tell me is as pretty as pretty can be.
But the people in manufacturing towns are always disreputable.
"You began by saying that one report was false, Mrs.
I will not hear any evil spoken of Mr.
Ladislaw; he has already suffered too much injustice.
Her face was flushed and her lip trembled.
Sir James, glancing at her, repented of his stratagem; but Mrs.
Then we might have had her among us.
However! - it's no use being wise for other people.
Pray let us go in?
"I am going on immediately to Tipton," said Dorothea, rather haughtily.
Sir James could say nothing as he accompanied her to the carriage.
Lydgate, and had heard his voice accompanied by the piano.
I always believed he was good.
At last she said -.
"I must stay here a little, Mrs.
"The shutters are open, madam," said Mrs.
Kell, following Dorothea, who had walked along as she spoke.
Ladislaw is there, looking for something.
When she reached the door she said to Mrs.
"Go in first, and tell him that I am here.
Kell close to his elbow said -.
Casaubon is coming in, sir.
Will turned round quickly, and the next moment Dorothea was entering.
I don't think I ever shall - now.
"You wished me to know the reasons?
"Of course I must wish it.
There has been a mean implication against my character.
She only said earnestly, recurring to his last word -.
"I am sure no safeguard was ever needed against you.
They were wasting these last moments together in wretched silence.
"What shall you do in life?
"Have your intentions remained just the same as when we said good-by before?
"I shall work away at the first thing that offers.
I suppose one gets a habit of doing without happiness or hope.
"Oh, what sad words!" said Dorothea, with a dangerous tendency to sob.
It must be admitted to be a ghostly kind of wooing.
Will was not surprised at her silence.
Yet, after all, had she any love for him?
Neither of them knew how long they stood in that way.
"The horses are ready, madam, whenever you like to start.
"The day after to-morrow I shall leave Middlemarch.
She put out her hand, and Will took it for an instant with.
He turned away and took his portfolio under his arm.
"I have never done you injustice.
Please remember me," said Dorothea, repressing a rising sob.
"Why should you say that?
" said Will, with irritation?
"As if I were not in danger of forgetting everything else.
He had acted so as to defy reproach, and make wonder respectful.
The coachman was used to drive his grays at a good pane, Mr.
She could not look back at him.
" than she could stop the carriage to wait for him?
- how could she ever say to herself that she would defy it?
That evening Will spent with the Lydgates; the next evening he was gone.
"Have you seen much of your scientific phoenix, Lydgate, lately?
Toller at one of his Christmas dinner-parties, speaking to Mr.
Farebrother on his right hand.
Toller's banter about his belief in the new medical light.
"I am out of the way and he is too busy.
I am glad to hear it," said Dr?
Minchin, with mingled suavity and surprise.
"He gives a great deal of time to the New Hospital," said Mr.
Casaubon, who goes there often.
"Come, Toller, be candid," said Mr.
"I suppose his relations in the North back him up.
"I hope so," said Mr.
"Ay, by God! and the best too," said Mr.
"My friend Vincy didn't half like the marriage, I know that," said Mr.
" There was an emphatic kind of reticence in Mr.
Toller, with a slight touch of sarcasm, and there the subject was dropped.
This was not the first time that Mr.
"He may have been taking an opiate," was a thought that crossed Mr.
Farebrother's mind - "tic-douloureux perhaps - or medical worries.
And soon after that conversation at Mr.
The opportunity came at Mr.
Vincy's, where, on New Year's Day, there was a party, to which Mr.
Farebrother sat down by her.
Farebrother noticed that Lydgate seemed bored, and that Mr.
Vincy spoke as little as possible to his son-in-law.
"It is dreadfully dull for her when there is no company," said Mrs.
Vincy, who was seated at the old lady's side.
Farebrother, ours is a cheerful house.
I am of a cheerful disposition myself, and Mr.
Vincy always likes something to be going on.
That is what Rosamond has been used to.
Vincy did lower her tone slightly with this parenthesis.
But my children are all good-tempered, thank God.
This was easily credible to any one looking at Mrs.
But presently the corner became still more animated, for Mr.
Tell about him now," said Louisa.
"Oh, I dare say; I am quite cut out.
"Yes," added Mary; "ask Mr.
"Please," said Louisa, looking up at the Vicar.
"No, no, I am a grave old parson.
Shall I preach you a sermon?
" said he, putting on his short-sighted glasses, and pursing up his lips?
Farebrother, rising and walking - away.
"A delightful young person is Miss Garth," said Mrs.
Farebrother, who had been watching her son's movements.
Vincy, obliged to reply, as the old lady turned to her expectantly.
"It is a pity she is not better-looking.
"I cannot say that," said Mrs.
But at the end he got Mr.
Chichely to take his place, and left the room.
I owe that to you, Mrs.
"Ah, you didn't mean me to know it; I call that ungenerous reticence.
"It was Brooke who let it out, only the other day.
Casaubon would hear of no one else.
"Oh, Brooke is such a leaky-minded fool," said Lydgate, contemptuously.
"Well, I was glad of the leakiness then.
And you certainly have done me one.
I have no need to hang on the smiles of chance now.
He answered in a tone of good-humored admission -.
"Ah, there's enormous patience wanted with the way of the world.
"People make much more of their difficulties than they need to do.
Farebrother, and he could not bear it.
Besides, behind all making of such offers what else must come?
- that he should "mention his case," imply that he wanted specific things?
At that moment, suicide seemed easier.
" said the Vicar, devouring his wounded feeling?
And they went into the drawing-room.
Farebrother's power to give him the help he immediately wanted.
You must expect your practice to be lowered.
"My dear Rosamond, it is not a question of choice.
We have begun too expensively.
Peacock, you know, lived in a much smaller house than this.
But we married because we loved each other, I suppose.
And that may help us to pull along till things get better.
Come, dear, put down that work and come to me.
And he began again to speak persuasively.
"But I have heard you express your disgust at that way of living.
"Yes, they have bad taste in everything - they make economy look ugly.
I only meant that they avoid expenses, although Wrench has a capital practice.
"Why should not you have a good practice, Tertius?
I am sure you began well, and you got several good houses.
That is not the question between us.
"It was understood from the beginning that my services would be gratuitous.
That, again, need not enter into our discussion.
I have pointed out what is the only probability," said Lydgate, impatiently.
Then checking himself, he went on more quietly -.
I can employ Trumbull to speak to Plymdale about it.
"I am very sorry, Rosamond; I know this is painful.
"I explained it to you at the time, dear.
That was only a security and behind that Security there is a debt.
At last she said, without hurry and with careful emphasis -.
Of course, I don't like it; it's the only thing I can do.
" He wheeled round there, and turned towards her.
"I should have thought there were many other means than that," said Rosamond.
"Let us have a sale and leave Middlemarch altogether.
"You will not behave as you ought to do to your own family.
Understand then, that it is what I LIKE TO DO.
But for all that, his will was not a whit stronger than hers.
But this was something quite distinct from loving HIM.
But Rosamond herself touched on it at breakfast by saying, mildly -.
"Have you spoken to Trumbull yet?
No time must be lost.
Ned's mother, and entered with pretty congratulations into the of the coming marriage.
"Yes, Ned is most happy, I must say.
And Sophy Toller is all I could desire in a daughter-in-law.
And the connection is everything we should desire.
But that is not what I look at.
I don't mean with the titled aristocracy.
I see very little good in people aiming out of their own sphere.
"I have always thought her very agreeable," said Rosamond.
Plymdale has been always on Mr.
And I myself prefer serious opinions.
But the Tollers have welcomed Ned all the same.
But I am thankful he has not.
It is a poor preparation both for here and Hereafter.
"Oh dear, yes; appearances have very little to do with happiness," said Rosamond.
"I think there is every prospect of their being a happy couple.
What house will they take?
"Oh, as for that, they must put up with what they can get.
They have been looking at the house in St.
Peter's Place, next to Mr.
Hackbutt's; it belongs to him, and he is putting it nicely in repair.
I suppose they are not likely to hear of a better.
Indeed, I think Ned will decide the matter to-day.
"I should think it is a nice house; I like St.
"Well, it is near the Church, and a genteel situation.
But the windows are narrow, and it is all ups and downs.
You don't happen to know of any other that would be at liberty?
"Oh no; I hear so little of those things.
She returned home by Mr.
Borthrop Trumbull's office, meaning to call there.
Rosamond's first question was, whether her husband had called on Mr.
Trumbull that morning, to speak about disposing of their house.
"I was about to fulfil his order, if possible, this afternoon.
He wished me not to procrastinate.
"I called to tell you not to go any further, Mr.
Confidence is sacred with me on business or any other topic.
I am then to consider the commission withdrawn?
Ned Plymdale has taken a house-the one in St.
Peter's Place next to Mr.
Lydgate would be annoyed that his orders should be fulfilled uselessly.
And besides that, there are other circumstances which render the proposal unnecessary.
Trumbull, who felt pleasure in conjecturing that some new resources had been opened.
"Rely on me, I beg.
The affair shall go no further.
If I can get my mind clear again, I shall do.
Ned Plymdale has taken a house already.
Then flushing with an unpleasant consciousness, he asked -.
Peter's Place, next to Mr.
a husband without them is an absurdity?
"Perhaps some one else may turn up.
I told Trumbull to be on the look-out if he failed with Plymdale.
After a pause, she said -.
"How much money is it that those disagreeable people want?
"Those who took the list - and the others.
"Why should you not mention the sum?
But there had been total silence.
"I shall try to see Trumbull this morning, and tell him to.
advertise the house in the `Pioneer' and the `Trumpet.
And Trumbull seems to have got no bite at all.
Rosamond knew that the inevitable moment was come.
Lydgate stared at her in mute amazement.
"May I ask when and why you did so?
I think that was reason enough.
"Clearly - you had a right to speak, but only to me.
"I remembered what you said.
You spoke just as violently as you do now.
"And suppose I disregard your opinion as you disregard mine?
"You can do so, of course.
Rosamond took advantage of his silence.
"When we were married everyone felt that your position was very high.
As to saying that he was master, it was not the fact.
He swallowed half his cup of coffee, and then rose to go.
Lydgate gave a short laugh.
But he only said "Oh yes," impatiently, and went away.
His flushed effort while talking to Mr.
What was he to do?
She was full of hope.
She had expected him to be surprised.
He was afraid of saying something irremediably cruel.
Rosamond too had changed color as she read.
The letter ran in this way: -.
I never choose to write to a woman on matters of business.
My own family drains me to the last penny.
You might have gone into the army or the Church.
Your affectionate uncle, GODWIN LYDGATE.
She did not look at him, and made no reply.
"I had nearly resolved on going to Quallingham.
But it has been of no use for me to think of anything.
You have always been counteracting me secretly.
I shall at least know what I am doing then.
Even her father was unkind, and might have done more for them.
In that way I can never know what I have to trust to.
There would be some hope for us if you would admit this.
Am I such an unreasonable, furious brute?
Why should you not be open with me?
I have not been accustomed to language of that kind.
You spoke of its being impossible to live with me.
Certainly you have not made my life pleasant to me of late.
Lydgate flung himself into a chair, feeling checkmated.
What place was there in her mind for a remonstrance to lodge in?
You and I cannot have opposite interests.
I cannot part my happiness from yours.
When I hurt you, I hurt part of my own life?
I wish I had died with the baby.
Nevertheless she had mastered him.
Farebrother's suspicion as to the opiate was true, however.
It was the same with gambling.
He was no more tempted by such winning than he was by drink.
Bambridge, were regarded as men of pleasure.
One evening, however, he had occasion to seek Mr.
To run up to the billiard-room, as he was passing, would save time.
Bambridge had come in, but Lydgate did not notice him.
He was still winning when two new visitors entered.
Young Hawley, an accomplished billiard-player, brought a cool fresh hand to the cue.
Fred had been rewarding resolution by a little laxity of late.
Garth's under the eyes of Mary.
Garth in his gig, or on the sober cob which Mr.
They had sport, and never learned to write a bookkeeping hand.
Well, when sovereigns were flying about, why shouldn't he catch a few?
It is in such indefinable movements that action often begins.
The defiance was more exciting than the confidence, but it was less sure.
He continued to bet on his own play, but began often to fail.
Farebrother was below, and begged to speak with him.
" and drew him aside?
" But inspiration could hardly have served him better.
Farebrother had the effect of a sharp concussion.
"No, no," said Lydgate; "I have nothing particular to say to him.
Come down with me to Farebrother.
Farebrother; and he went down.
Walk with me to St.
It was a fine night, the sky thick with stars, and Mr.
The next thing he said was -.
"I thought Lydgate never went to the Green Dragon?
"So did I," said Fred.
"But he said that he went to see Bambridge.
"He was not playing, then?
But I suppose it was an accidental thing.
I have never seen him there before.
"You have been going often yourself, then, lately?
"Oh, about five or six times.
"I made a clean breast to you.
"I suppose that gives me a warrant to speak about the matter now.
It is understood between us, is it not?
I may take my turn in talking a little about myself?
"I am under the deepest obligation to you, Mr.
Farebrother," said Fred, in a state of uncomfortable surmise.
"I have not made any bets," said Fred, hastily.
But no feeling could quell Fred's alarm.
"Clearly not, when her affection met yours.
I can easily conceive such a result," repeated Mr.
" It seemed to Fred that if Mr.
"So I am; that is why we are here.
But I have had a strong disposition to be otherwise.
And now, do you understand me?
Fred was moved quite newly.
A good degree of that effect was just then present in Fred Vincy.
Farebrother had gathered the impulse to say something more.
"I shall never forget what you have done," Fred answered.
Good-by, and God bless you.
In that way they parted.
Farebrother's might be concentrated into a single shrug and one little speech.
That alternative was to apply to Mr.
At first he had considered whether he should write to Mr.
He said, let Lydgate ask Bulstrode: they have always been hand and glove.
Still the days passed and no letter was written, no special interview sought.
Then the sale might happen as a necessary preparation for going away?
But in the midst of his hesitation, opportunity came to decide him.
Bulstrode requested Lydgate to call on him at the Bank.
He had been insisting that it would be well for Mr.
Bulstrode to relax his attention to business.
"With regard to what you say, Mr.
That would be a measure which you would recommend?
He said in reply -.
"The loss to the Hospital can hardly be made up, I fear.
" Another pause, but Lydgate did not speak.
"I myself, as you know, Mr.
But since providential indications demand a renunciation from me, I renounce.
Bulstrode showed a rather exasperating ability in this conversation.
After some rapid reflection, he only asked -.
Lydgate was ready to say, "If Mrs.
Casaubon would take your place, there would be gain, instead of loss.
"Precisely; that is what she expressly desires.
Her decision, she says, will much depend on what you can tell her.
I have her letter here," said Mr.
Bulstrode, drawing it out, and reading from it.
"`I am immediately otherwise engaged,' she says.
But the best use is not always the same with monetary success.
I get chiefly patients who can't pay me.
I had very little fortune left when I came here.
I have no prospects of money from my own family.
Lydgate hated to hear himself.
But he had spoken now, and had spoken with unmistakable directness.
Bulstrode replied without haste, but also without hesitation.
"I am grieved, though, I confess, not surprised by this information, Mr.
My advice to you, Mr.
"It is always a trial," said Mr.
I recommend you to weigh the advice I have given.
"Thank you," said Lydgate, not quite knowing what he said.
"I have occupied you too long.
On Christmas Eve he had reappeared at The Shrubs.
But his cunning had a little overcast its mark.
He would himself drive the unfortunate being away the next morning.
In these hints he felt that he was supplying Mrs.
Bulstrode should be even tempted to listen at the door.
That recoil had at last urged him to make preparations for quitting Middlemarch.
This was the experience which had determined his conversation with Lydgate.
"I'll think about it," said Caleb, in his blunt way.
"I'll see how I can make it out.
He mentioned his notion to Mrs.
I never was better pleased with a notion in my life.
And then the children might be married by-and-by, Susan.
Garth, in a tone of gentle caution.
"Oh, I don't know," said Caleb, swinging his head aside.
"Marriage is a taming thing.
Fred would want less of my bit and bridle.
However, I shall say nothing till I know the ground I'm treading on.
I shall speak to Bulstrode again.
He took his earliest opportunity of doing so.
On that ground he made no objection to Mr.
"My dear Harriet," said Mr.
I cannot be expected to take care of his married children.
That seemed to be true, and Mrs.
But remembering that dialogue, Mr.
"Well, well," replied Caleb; "the castle will tumble about nobody's head.
Garth was outside and begged to speak with him.
"By all means," said Bulstrode; and Caleb entered.
Garth," continued the banker, in his suavest tone.
"I am glad that you arrived just in time to find me here.
I know you count your minutes.
"I have just come away from Stone Court, Mr.
Abel has done well with the lambs this year.
He wants a doctor, and I came to tell you of that.
He saw the shock of his words passing through Bulstrode's frame.
"Do you know how he came there?
"Certainly," said Bulstrode, whose mind was very active at this moment.
"Perhaps you will yourself oblige me, Mr.
Garth, by calling at Mr.
And he is friendly to me-I can be of use to him.
"I am exceedingly obliged to you, Mr.
Garth," he said, in his usual tone of politeness.
Perhaps you had some other business with me?
If so, pray be seated?
"I wish to say, Mr.
But I must give it up.
" A sharp certainty entered like a stab into Bulstrode's soul.
Garth," was all he could say at first.
"It is," said Caleb; "but it is quite fixed.
I must give it up.
I can't deny that I act upon what I heard from him.
"You are a conscientious man, Mr.
Garth - a man, I trust, who feels himself accountable to God.
I hope I should have a feeling for my fellow-creature.
And I can't be happy in working with you, or profiting by you.
I must beg you to seek another agent.
"You make it harder to me by turning your back on me.
I don't judge you and say, he is wicked, and I am righteous.
If it is so with you,-well, I'm very sorry for you.
Everything else is buried, so far as my will goes.
And I wish you good-day.
" Caleb's wrath was stirred, and he said, indignantly -?
"Why should I have said it if I didn't mean it?
I am in no fear of you?
Such tales as that will never tempt my tongue.
I rob you of no good chance.
That is my way of thinking, Mr.
Bulstrode, and what I say, I've no need to swear.
"He was disposed to interfere too much, was he?
"Oh," said Caleb, bowing his head and waving his hand gravely.
On that side it might be concluded that there had been no betrayal.
In less than an hour Lydgate arrived.
Bulstrode met him outside the wainscoted parlor, where Raffles was, and said -.
"I have called you in, Mr.
Being destitute, he has a claim on me.
I believe he is seriously ill: apparently his mind is affected.
I feel bound to do the utmost for him.
"No - and yes," said Lydgate, half dubiously.
He should be well watched and attended to.
"I will remain here myself," said Bulstrode.
Abel and her husband are inexperienced.
"I should think that is hardly necessary," said Lydgate.
"He seems tame and terrified enough.
He might become more unmanageable.
But there is a man here - is there not?
Abel and her husband can relieve or aid me, if necessary.
"You think, then, that the case is hopeful?
" said Bulstrode, when Lydgate had ended giving his orders?
Still, new symptoms may arise.
I shall come again to-morrow morning.
After waiting for the note to be carried to Mrs.
I suppose he is an object of charity to Bulstrode.
Lydgate was, he was told that she was in her bedroom.
The strong man had had too much to bear that day.
He let his head fall beside hers and sobbed.
"Do as you like," said Lydgate.
"But things are not coming to a crisis immediately.
I shall stay until you request me to do otherwise?
Lydgate said no more, but went out on his rounds.
She could not bear to look at him.
And what harm if he did talk?
He was restless and sleepless, but still quailing and manageable.
Bulstrode's native imperiousness and strength of determination served him well.
And in the train of those images came their apology.
What was the removal of this wretched creature?
He was impenitent-but were not public criminals impenitent?
- yet the law decided on their fate?
But of course intention was everything in the question of right and wrong?
And Bulstrode set himself to keep his intention separate from his desire.
He inwardly declared that he intended to obey orders.
Still, he did obey the orders.
He regretted that he had not at once made even an unreasonable money-sacrifice.
Bat the regret had perhaps come too late.
"What do you think of him?
" said Bulstrode, in private?
"No; I still think he may come round.
Are you going to stay here yourself?
"Yes, I think so," said Bulstrode, governing himself and speaking with deliberation.
Bulstrode is advised of the reasons which detain me.
You have some fresh instructions, I presume.
He may wear through even without much food.
There's a good deal of strength in him.
"You look ill yourself, Mr.
"I fear you are harassed.
"Yes, I am," said Lydgate, brusquely, holding his hat, and ready to go.
"Something new, I fear," said Bulstrode, inquiringly.
"No, thank you," said Lydgate, with some hauteur.
"I mentioned to you yesterday what was the state of my affairs.
One can tell a good deal of trouble in a short sentence.
I will say good morning.
Lydgate, stay," said Bulstrode; "I have been reconsidering this subject.
I was yesterday taken by surprise, and saw it superficially.
I could set about economizing in our way of living.
And by-and-by my practice might look up.
"If you will wait a moment, Mr.
Lydgate, I will draw a cheek to that amount.
"You can give me a note of hand for this, Mr.
Lydgate," said the banker, advancing towards him with the check.
"And by-and-by, I hope, you may be in circumstances gradually to repay me.
"I am deeply obliged to you," said Lydgate.
Is it that he distinctly means to break it?
Abel, who, if necessary, could call her husband.
At the end of half an hour or more he called Mrs.
Abel and told her that he found himself unfit for further watching.
You will ask your husband for help if necessary.
I must go to bed early.
"You've much need, sir, I'm sure," said Mrs.
Abel, "and to take something more strengthening than what you've done.
At any rate he must risk this.
Then, he wished that he had begged Lydgate to come again that evening.
Should he send for Lydgate?
What was the use of sending for him?
Bulstrode shrank from that result?
The thought was, that he had not told Mrs.
Abel when the doses of opium must cease.
He took hold of the candlestick, but stood motionless for a long while.
She might already have given him more than Lydgate had prescribed.
He was not asleep, then.
He turned into his own room.
Before he had quite undressed, Mrs.
And he says more and more he's sinking down through the earth.
A struggle was going on within him.
When I nursed my poor master, Mr.
Abel, with a touch of remonstrance in her tone.
Here a key was thrust through the inch of doorway, and Mr.
Bulstrode said huskily, "That is the key of the wine-cooler.
You will find plenty of brandy there.
Early in the morning - about six - Mr.
Bulstrode rose and spent some time in prayer.
He listened in the passage, and could hear hard stertorous breathing.
When he re-entered the house, he felt startled at the sight of Mrs.
"How is your patient - asleep, I think?
" he said, with an attempt at cheerfulness in his tone?
"He's gone very deep, sir," said Mrs.
"He went off gradual between three and four o'clock.
Would you please to go and look at him?
I thought it no harm to leave him?
My man's gone afield, and the little girl's seeing to the kettles.
He decided to wait, and told Mrs.
Abel that she might go about her work-he could watch in the bed-chamber.
Casaubon would take a large share in the expenses of the Hospital.
And who could say that the death of Raffles had been hastened?
Who knew what would have saved him?
"When did this change begin?
" said he, looking at Bulstrode?
"I did not watch by him last night," said Bulstrode.
"I was over-worn, and left him under Mrs.
She said that he sank into sleep between three and four o'clock.
When I came in before eight he was nearly in this condition.
This morning Lydgate was in a state of recovered hope and freedom.
And he was conscious that Bulstrode had been a benefactor to him.
But he was uneasy about this case.
He had not expected it to terminate as it had done.
And after all, he himself might be wrong.
On returning home Lydgate had a visit from Mr.
Farebrother's thoughts about him had been rather gloomy.
Could this too be a proud rejection of sympathy and help?
Never mind; the sympathy and help should be offered?
They were both seated by this time, and Lydgate answered immediately -.
"I think I know what you mean.
You had heard that there was an execution in the house?
"But the danger is over; the debt is paid.
"I like that better than all the news in the `Times.
' I confess I came to you with a heavy heart.
"Thank you for coming," said Lydgate, cordially.
"I can enjoy the kindness all the more because I am happier.
I have certainly been a good deal crushed.
Forgive me if I take a liberty.
"I don't believe you will ask anything that ought to offend me.
"No," said Lydgate, colouring slightly.
"Well, that is generous," said Mr.
Farebrother, compelling himself to approve of the man whom he disliked.
I am glad to think that he has acted accordingly.
Lydgate felt uncomfortable under these kindly suppositions.
He let the kindly suppositions pass.
"I shall set up a surgery," he said.
"I really think I made a mistaken effort in that respect.
And if Rosamond will not mind, I shall take an apprentice.
Five days after the death of Raffles, Mr.
Bambridge would gratify them by being shot "from here to Hereford.
Bambridge by a very ugly name until the exercise made his throat dry.
When the discourse was at this point of animation, came up Mr.
I picked up a fine story about Bulstrode.
Do you know how he came by his fortune?
"I had it from a party who was an old chum of Bulstrode's.
However, he blabbed to me at Bilkley: he takes a stiff glass.
A man should know when to pull up.
Where can he be found?
"I furnished his funeral yesterday.
He was buried at Lowick.
" There was a strong sensation among the listeners.
Bambridge gave an ejaculation in which "brimstone" was the mildest word, and Mr.
Hawley, knitting his brows and bending his head forward, exclaimed, "What?
- where did the man die?
"At Stone Court," said the draper.
"The housekeeper said he was a relation of the master's.
He came there ill on Friday.
"Why, it was on Wednesday I took a glass with him," interposed Bambridge.
"Did any doctor attend him?
Bulstrode sat up with him one night.
He died the third morning.
"Go on, Bambridge," said Mr.
"What did this fellow say about Bulstrode?
Bambridge delivered his narrative in the hearing of seven.
But this gossip about Bulstrode spread through Middlemarch like the smell of fire.
In this way it came to his knowledge that Mr.
Garth had carried the man to Stone Court in his gig; and Mr.
But while they were talking another combination was silently going forward in Mr.
However, there's no knowing what a mixture will turn out beforehand.
Some sorts of dirt serve to clarify.
"It's just what I should have expected," said Mr.
"Any cursed alien blood, Jew, Corsican, or Gypsy.
"I know he's one of your black sheep, Hawley.
But he is really a disinterested, unworldly fellow," said Mr.
"Ay, ay, that is your Whiggish twist," said Mr.
Bulstrode herself, who mentioned the loan to Mrs.
This was the tone of thought chiefly sanctioned by Mrs.
Limp, a meditative shoemaker, with weak eyes and a piping voice.
"If one raskill said it, it's more reason why another should.
Crabbe, the glazier, who gathered much news and groped among it dimly.
"He'll be drove away, whether or no," said Mr.
Dill, the barber, who had just dropped in.
Thesiger is turned against him, and wants him out o' the parish.
' Fletcher said so himself?
"Don't they say as there's somebody can strip it off him?
"Fletcher says it's no such thing.
"Look you there now!" said Mrs.
Then by that, it's o' no use who your father and mother is.
Fletcher may say that if he likes, but I say, don't Fletcher ME!".
Dill affected to laugh in a complimentary way at Mrs.
"Finer gentleman! I'll warrant him," said Mrs.
Dollop; "and a far personabler man, by what I can hear.
As I said when Mr.
' That was what I said, and Mr.
Baldwin can bear me witness.
"And in the rights of it too," said Mr.
"I'll believe you!" said Mrs.
Dallop, with a touch of scorn at Mr.
There was a chorus of adhesion from the more courageous; but Mr.
"Why shouldn't they dig the man up and have the Crowner?
"It's been done many and many's the time.
If there's been foul play they might find it out.
Jonas!" said Mrs Dollop, emphatically.
"I know what doctors are.
They're a deal too cunning to be found out.
So I'll leave your own sense to judge.
There's many a mother's child might ha' rued it.
Hence Bulstrode felt himself providentially secured.
It seemed that everybody of mark had been earlier than they.
Farebrother sat opposite, not far from Mr.
Hawley; all the medical men were there; Mr.
Thesiger was in the chair, and Mr.
Brooke of Tipton was on his right hand.
Lydgate could see again the peculiar interchange of glances before Mr.
Hawley started up, and said in his firm resonant voice, "Mr.
Thesiger sanctioned the request, Mr.
Bulstrode sat down, and Mr.
"In what I have to say, Mr.
It is our united sentiment that Mr.
I don't say that Mr.
All eyes in the room were turned on Mr.
But in that intense being lay the strength of reaction.
Before the last words were out of Mr.
He said, turning first toward Mr.
Thesiger, and then looking at Mr.
And their consciences become strict against me.
Hawley's outburst was instantaneous, and left the others behind in silence.
Hawley," said the chairman; and Mr.
Farebrother about the ugly light in which Lydgate had come to be regarded.
Farebrother was going to walk back to Lowick.
"Step into my carriage," said Mr.
"I am going round to see Mrs.
She was to come back from Yorkshire last night.
She will like to see me, you know.
So they drove along, Mr.
"Well, my dear," said Mr.
Brooke, "we have just come from a meeting-a sanitary meeting, you know.
I have engaged with Mr.
"Oh, my dear," said Mr.
Brooke, "we have been hearing bad news-bad news, you know.
They walked through the garden towards the churchyard gate, Mr.
After a short silence, pausing at the churchyard gate, and addressing Mr.
Farebrother, she said energetically -.
"You don't believe that Mr.
Lydgate is guilty of anything base?
I will not believe it?
Let us find out the truth and clear him!".
"It is a delicate matter to touch," he said.
"How can we begin to inquire into it?
He would probably take it as a deadly insult.
He disagreed with her now.
Lydgate must know-at least he will soon come to know how he stands.
If he can clear himself, he will.
He must act for himself.
"I think his friends must wait till they find an opportunity," added Mr.
I would not believe anything worse of him except under stringent proof.
"Oh, how cruel!" said Dorothea, clasping her hands.
Besides, there is a man's character beforehand to speak for him?
Lydgate to tell me the truth, that I might help him.
Why should I be afraid?
Farebrother, almost converted by Dorothea's ardor.
" said Sir James, with his little frown.
We don't know yet what may turn up.
You must agree with me?
" he ended, looking at Mr?
"I do think it would be better to wait," said the latter.
"Yes, yes, my dear," said Mr.
"It is easy to go too far, you know.
You must not let your ideas run away with you.
And that is the good of having a brother instead of a husband.
A husband would not let you have your plans.
"As if I wanted a husband!" said Dorothea.
"I only want not to have my feelings checked at every turn.
Casaubon was still undisciplined enough to burst into angry tears.
You used to submit to Mr.
" said Celia, with a sense of stringency in her argument?
"Because he only wishes what is for your own good.
And, of course, men know best about everything, except what women know better.
" Dorothea laughed and forgot her tears.
"Well, I mean about babies and those things," explained Celia.
When Lydgate had allayed Mrs.
In such moments a man can hardly escape being unloving.
For he was very miserable.
And yet how was he to set about vindicating himself?
Bulstrode had been in dread of scandalous disclosures on the part of Raffles.
Lydgate could now construct all the probabilities of the case.
There was a benumbing cruelty in his position.
" The circumstances would always be stronger than his assertion.
And after all, the suspicion of Bulstrode's motives might be unjust.
Science is properly more scrupulous than dogma.
The reasons were too plain now.
The general black-balling had begun.
He would not retreat before calumny, as if he submitted to it.
"I shall do as I think right, and explain to nobody.
How would Rosamond take it all?
He preferred waiting for the incidental disclosure which events must soon bring about.
With the review of Mrs.
Bulstrode was vindicated from any resemblance to her husband.
Harriet's faults were her own.
"She has always been showy," said Mrs.
"We can hardly blame her for that," said Mrs.
Thesiger has always countenanced him," said Mrs.
"I think he must be sorry now.
Thesiger never goes into extremes.
He keeps to the truth in what is evangelical.
It is only clergymen like Mr.
Tyke is in great distress about him," said Mrs.
"And of coarse it is a discredit to his doctrines," said Mrs.
Sprague, who was elderly, and old-fashioned in her opinions.
Plymdale, who had been listening hitherto.
"Oh, my dear, we are forgetting," said Mrs.
"We ought not to be talking of this before you.
"I am sure I have no reason to be partial," said Mrs.
Plymdale has always been on good terms with Mr.
Bulstrode, and Harriet Vincy was my friend long before she married him.
Still, in point of religion, I must say, Mr.
The men tried at the assizes are not all over-religious, I suppose.
"I can't say that," said Mrs.
"She took him for better or worse, you know.
"Fancy living with such a man! I should expect to be poisoned.
"And a good wife poor Harriet has been," said Mrs.
"She thinks her husband the first of men.
It's true he has never denied her anything.
"Well, we shall see what she will do," said Mrs.
"I suppose she knows nothing yet, poor creature.
Do you think any hint has reached her?
"I should hardly think so," said Mrs.
Her own had a feather in it.
I have never seen that her religion made any difference in her dress.
"She wears very neat patterns always," said Mrs.
I must say it of Harriet that she wishes to do right.
"The Vincys know, for Mr.
Vincy was at the meeting.
It will he a great blow to him.
There is his daughter as well as his sister.
It really makes one shudder.
"Pride must have a fall," said Mrs.
"I suppose the Bulstrodes will go and live abroad somewhere," said Mrs.
"And a most deadly blow it will be to Harriet," said Mrs.
"If ever a woman was crushed, she will be.
I pity her from my heart.
And with all her faults, few women are better.
You might look into her drawers when you would - always the same.
And so she has brought up Kate and Ellen.
"He says Lydgate ought to have kept among the French.
"That would suit HER well enough, I dare say," said Mrs.
Plymdale; "there is that kind of lightness about her.
Plymdale was in a situation which caused her some complication of feeling.
There had been not only her intimacy with Mrs.
Something, she felt sure, had happened.
Lydgate, pray be open with me: I like to know the truth.
Has anything happened to Mr.
"Some little nervous shock," said Lydgate, evasively.
He felt that it was not for him to make the painful revelation.
"But what brought it on?
Bulstrode, looking directly at him with her large dark eyes.
"There is often something poisonous in the air of public rooms," said Lydgate.
Bulstrode was not satisfied with this answer.
Bulstrode's affairs, she should see or hear some sign of it.
Thesiger, who was not at home, and then drove to Mrs.
Hackbutt's on the other side of the churchyard.
Bulstrode was shown into the drawing-room, and Mrs.
She was resolved not to ask how Mr.
Bulstrode, after a few introductory remarks.
"Yes, he was," said Mrs.
Hackbutt, with the same attitude.
"The land is to be bought by subscription, I believe.
"It is an awful visitation.
But I always think Middlemarch a very healthy spot.
Hackbutt, with a slight sigh.
"Still, we must learn to resign ourselves, wherever our lot may be east.
Bulstrode and some of his frequent opponents - perhaps Mr.
Hackbutt might have been one of them.
That would account for everything.
But when she was in conversation with Mrs.
Plymdale that comforting explanation seemed no longer tenable.
Bulstrode had thought that she would sooner question Mrs.
For certain words of mysterious appropriateness that Mrs.
"God help you, Harriet! you know all.
That moment was perhaps worse than any which came after.
"People will talk," he said.
It's a breakdown blow, and it damages Lydgate as much as Bulstrode.
I don't pretend to say what is the truth.
You'd better have been a Vincy all your life, and so had Rosamond.
"But you must bear up as well as you can, Harriet.
"Give me your arm to the carriage, Walter," said Mrs.
I shall take no dinner.
She locked herself in her room.
He felt himself perishing slowly in unpitied misery.
Perhaps he should never see his wife's face with affection in it again.
He dared not look up at her.
He burst out crying and they cried together, she sitting at his side.
His confession was silent, and her promise of faithfulness was silent.
She could not say, "How much is only slander and false suspicion?
" and he did not say, "I am innocent?
-that Will exaggerated his admiration for Mrs?
Casaubon in order to pique herself.
In this way poor Rosamond's brain had been busy before Will's departure.
But he was quite uncertain as to the time.
There was nothing unendurable now: the debts were paid, Mr.
That was a bright bit of morning.
But soon the sky became black over poor Rosamond.
What is he writing to you about?
" said Lydgate, wonderingly, as he handed the note to her?
"Why on earth have you been sending out invitations without telling me, Rosamond?
I suppose you have been inviting others, and they have refused too.
They greeted her with sad looks, saying "Well, my dear!" and no more.
"Is there anything the matter, papa?
He did not answer, but Mrs.
Vincy said, "Oh, my dear, have you heard nothing?
It won't be long before it reaches you?
"Is it anything about Tertius?
" said Rosamond, turning pale?
To think of your marrying into this trouble.
Debt was bad enough, but this will be worse.
"Stay, stay, Lucy," said Mr.
"Have you heard nothing about your uncle Bulstrode, Rosamond?
I think Lydgate must leave the town.
Things have gone against him.
I dare say he couldn't help it.
I don't accuse him of any harm," said Mr.
He had always before been disposed to find the utmost fault with Lydgate.
The shock to Rosamond was terrible.
All the shame seemed to be there.
"She bears it beyond anything," said her mother when she was gone.
"Ah, thank God!" said Mr.
Vincy, who was much broken down.
But Rosamond went home with a sense of justified repugnance towards her husband.
What had he really done - how had he really acted?
Why had he not told her everything?
He thought, "I am a fool.
Haven't I given up expecting anything?
I have married care, not help?
" And that evening he said -.
"Rosamond, have you heard anything that distresses you?
"That people think me disgraced?
"Yes," said Rosamond, faintly, beginning to sew again automatically.
But Rosamond on her side went on moving her fingers languidly.
He was always to her a being apart, doing what she objected to.
I cannot go on living here.
Let us go to London.
Papa, and every one else, says you had better go.
He could not bear it.
Casaubon, who now wished, as before, to discuss the question with Lydgate.
"Your views may possibly have undergone some change," wrote Mr.
Dorothea awaited his arrival with eager interest.
"I have wished very much to see you for a long while, Mr.
Bulstrode applied to me again about the Hospital.
I may be obliged to leave the town.
"Not because there is no one to believe in you?
" said Dorothea, pouring out her words in clearness from a full heart?
"I know the unhappy mistakes about you.
I knew them from the first moment to be mistakes.
You have never done anything vile.
You would not do anything dishonorable.
He drew a deep breath, and said, "Thank you.
"I beseech you to tell me how everything was," said Dorothea, fearlessly.
"I am sure that the truth would clear you.
"Tell me, pray," said Dorothea, with simple earnestness; "then we can consult together.
But I should like to tell you everything.
"Do trust me," said Dorothea; "I will not repeat anything without your leave.
Farebrother would believe me, and my uncle, and Sir James Chettam.
I would take any pains to clear you.
I have very little to do.
There is nothing better that I can do in the world.
But all that has nothing to do with the public belief.
"Oh, it is hard!" said Dorothea.
"I understand the difficulty there is in your vindicating yourself.
I know you meant that.
I meant everything to be different with me.
I thought I had more strength and mastery.
But the most terrible obstacles are such as nobody can see except oneself.
"It would be quite worth my while," said Dorothea, simply.
I don't know what to do.
A smile broke through the gloom of Lydgate's face.
Casaubon had a very blurred shortsighted knowledge, little helped by her imagination.
) But she took the smile as encouragement of her plan.
Lydgate's smile had died away.
At last he turned towards her and said impetuously -.
"Why should I not tell you?
- you know what sort of bond marriage is?
Dorothea felt her heart beginning to beat faster.
Had he that sorrow too?
But she feared to say any word, and he went on immediately?
I can't see her miserable.
"And she has set her mind against staying.
He did not speak immediately.
"And, indeed, I have lost all spirit about carrying on my life here.
We have not been able to speak to each other about it.
It is my fault; I ought to be more open.
But I have been suffering cruelly.
"May I go and see her?
"Would she accept my sympathy?
I would tell her that you shall be cleared in every fair mind.
I would cheer her heart.
Will you ask her if I may go to see her?
I did see her once?
"I am sure you may," said Lydgate, seizing the proposition with some hope.
He broke off, and there was a moment's silence.
This was a point on which even sympathy might make a wound.
She returned to the more outward aspect of Lydgate's position, saying cheerfully -.
Lydgate did not answer, and she saw that he was debating with himself.
"You need not decide immediately," she said, gently.
"No; I prefer that there should be no interval left for wavering.
"I can think of nothing for a long while but getting an income.
"It hurts me very much to hear you speak so hopelessly," said Dorothea.
Why should not people do these things?
It is so difficult to make shares at all even?
"It is good that you should have such feelings.
I have not given guarantees enough.
"Now that is not brave," said Dorothea, - "to give up the fight.
That would soon get distorted.
You can only repeat my own report of myself.
Farebrother will believe - others will believe," said Dorothea.
"I don't know," said Lydgate, with something like a groan in his voice.
"I have not taken a bribe yet.
But there is a pale shade of bribery which is sometimes called prosperity.
"I hope she will like me.
Casaubon must have raised some heroic hallucination in her.
- there was certainly an unusual feeling between them?
And Casaubon must have had a notion of it.
Well - her love might help a man more than her money.
I suppose we shall have very little money?
I am sure I hope some one will help us.
Vincy had said, "Yes, child, I don't mind a hundred or two.
I can see the end of that.
She had a letter to post - a letter addressed to Mr.
Lydgate had always been associated for her with that of Will Ladislaw.
She was sure that the regard was blameless.
And it had from the first acted strongly on Will Ladislaw.
And he was right there.
And perhaps there had been some pleasure in pointing Mr.
Brooke's attractive suggestion of suitable characteristics.
This habitual state of feeling about Will Ladislaw had been strong.
That was a trouble which no third person must directly touch.
Farebrother, who had joyfully accepted the justifying explanation of Lydgate's conduct.
"Will you please to walk in, and I'll go and see.
"Say that I am Mrs.
Lydgate, the servant did not know that you were here.
I called to deliver an important letter for Mr.
Lydgate, which I wished to put into your own hands.
And that was really her experience.
She needed something active to turn her excitement out upon.
"And you don't see anything you look at, Arthur or anything.
You are going to do something uncomfortable, I know.
Is it all about Mr.
Lydgate, or has something else happened?
" Celia had been used to watch her sister with expectation?
"Dear me, Dodo, are you going to have a scheme for them?
" said Celia, a little uneasy at this Hamlet-like raving?
Her little hands which she folded before her were very cold.
In flute-like tones of sarcasm she said -.
"You can easily go after Mrs.
Casaubon and explain your preference.
"Go after her!" he burst out, with a sharp edge in his voice.
- Explain! How can a man explain at the expense of a woman?
"You can tell her what you please," said Rosamond with more tremor.
"Do you suppose she would like me better for sacrificing you?
Presently he burst out again -.
But I had one certainty - that she believed in me.
Whatever people had said or done about me, she believed in me.
No other woman exists by the side of her.
"If you like," Rosamond answered, just audibly.
The perception that she was ill threw every other thought into the background.
He had not ventured to ask Rosamond if Mrs.
Lydgate tell you that I came this morning?
"Poor Rosamond is ill," Lydgate added immediately on his greeting.
"Not seriously, I hope," said Will.
"No - only a slight nervous shock - the effect of some agitation.
She has been overwrought lately.
The truth is, Ladislaw, I am an unlucky devil.
I suppose it is true that Raffles spoke to you.
But he said nothing of Bulstrode's offer to him.
Lydgate too was reticent in the midst of his confidence.
" Will felt inexpressibly mournful, and said nothing.
When Dorothea had seen Mr.
That house was never dull, Mr.
"I have lost my tortoise-shell lozenge-box.
"Is it a great treasure, aunt?
Farebrother, putting up his glasses and looking at the carpet.
Ladislaw gave it me," said Miss Noble.
"Oh, if it is Ladislaw's present," said Mr.
Farebrother, in a deep tone of comprehension, getting up and hunting.
"That is an affair of the heart with my aunt," said Mr.
Farebrother, smiling at Dorothea, as he reseated himself.
"If Henrietta Noble forms an attachment to any one, Mrs.
Ladislaw's shoes, I would," said Henrietta Noble.
Dorothea made an attempt at smiling in return.
That sort of work tells upon one after the excitement is over.
"Oh, I did love him!".
She rose, and wrapped warm things around her, and seated.
herself in a great chair where she had often watched before.
For now the thoughts came thickly.
Was she alone in that scene?
Was it her event only?
Presently she rang for Tantripp, who came in her dressing-gown.
"You'll kill yourself, you WILL.
"Don't be alarmed, Tantripp," said Dorothea, smiling.
"I have slept; I am not ill.
I shall be glad of a cup of coffee as soon as possible.
Tantripp would never have found the clew to this mystery.
For the resolve was not easy.
He heard her voice, and immediately came to her.
"Do you think that Mrs.
Lydgate can receive me this morning?
" she said, suddenly doubting?
"Yes, the check is going to Bulstrode to-day.
I thought he looked rather battered and depressed.
" And Rosamond had made no reply.
Rosamond dared not say no.
Nevertheless, in her new humiliating uncertainty she dared do nothing but comply.
" And Lydgate assented, thinking that he fully understood this wish.
Casaubon come to say anything to her about Will?
Rosamond's eye was quick for faces; she saw that Mrs.
And Dorothea began to speak quite simply, gathering firmness as she went on.
It will cheer you - will it not?
She answered prettily, in the new ease of her soul -.
"I know you have been very good.
I shall like to hear anything you will say to me about Tertius.
And I have told Mr.
Brooke, and Sir James Chettam: they all believe in your husband.
That will cheer you, will it not?
That will give you courage?
She said, with blushing embarrassment, "Thank you: you are very kind.
But you will forgive him.
He could speak to me because I am an indifferent person.
That is why I came yesterday, and why I am come to-day.
Trouble is so hard to bear, is it not?
What was the use of thinking about behavior after this crying?
Pride was broken down between these two.
"We were talking about your husband," Dorothea said, with some timidity.
"I thought his looks were sadly changed with suffering the other day.
I had not seen him for many weeks before.
"It was himself he blamed for not speaking," said Dorothea.
There is something even awful in the nearness it brings.
She stopped in speechless agitation.
not crying, but feeling as if she were being inwardly grappled.
They moved apart, looking at each other.
"And now I think he hates me because-because you mistook him yesterday.
But it shall not be through me.
He said yesterday that no other woman existed for him beside you.
The blame of what happened is entirely mine.
He said he could never explain to you - because of me.
He said you could never think well of him again.
But now I have told you, and he cannot reproach me any more.
Rosamond had delivered her soul under impulses which she had not known before.
The revulsion of feeling in Dorothea was too strong to be called joy.
"No, he cannot reproach you any more.
After they had been silent a little, she said -.
"You are not sorry that I came this morning?
"No, you have been very good to me," said Rosamond.
"I did not think that you would be so good.
I am not happy now.
"But better days will come.
Your husband will be rightly valued.
And he depends on you for comfort.
"Tertius did not find fault with me, then?
" said Rosamond, understanding now that Lydgate might have said anything to Mrs?
Casaubon, and that she certainly was different from other women.
Perhaps there was a faint taste of jealousy in the question.
A smile began to play over Dorothea's face as she said -.
"No, indeed! How could you imagine it?
" But here the door opened, and Lydgate entered?
"I am come back in my quality of doctor," he said.
"After I went away, I was haunted by two pale faces: Mrs.
Casaubon looked as much in need of care as you, Rosy.
I noticed that you were walking, Mrs.
Casaubon, and the sky has changed - I think we may have rain.
May I send some one to order your carriage to come for you?
I have always been accused of being immoderate and saying too much.
Farebrother and the other friends who had listened with belief to his story.
Casaubon now you have seen so much of her?
Lydgate laughed at the "so often.
" "But has she made you any less discontented with me?
"I think she has," said Rosamond, looking up in his face.
"How heavy your eyes are, Tertius - and do push your hair back.
He must walk as he could, carrying that burthen pitifully.
Thus he did nothing more decided than taking the Riverston coach.
Still, he opened and read it by his bed-candle.
There were only these few words in her neatly flowing hand: -.
She is not under any mistake about you.
I told her because she came to see me and was very kind.
You will have nothing to reproach me with now.
I shall not have made any difference to you.
The effect of these words was not quite all gladness.
But now - would Dorothea meet him in that world again?
To-day was to be spent quite differently.
What was there to be done in the village?
Should she order the carriage and drive to Tipton?
No; for some reason or other she preferred staying at Lowick?
"Do sit down," said Dorothea, rolling a chair forward.
"Am I wanted for anything?
I shall be so glad if I can do anything?
Ladislaw," continued the timid little woman.
She looked towards the window.
Could she go out and meet him in the grounds?
Besides, she shrank from going out to him.
"Yes, I will see him," said Dorothea.
"Pray tell him to come.
What else was there to be done?
How could any duty bind her to hardness?
"I wanted to see you," said Dorothea, having no other words at command.
I have been punished for my impatience.
You know-every one knows now - -a painful story about my parentage.
"But the affair is matter of gossip now," Will continued.
At least I thought it excused my coming.
He added, "You know that it must be altogether painful to me.
"Yes - yes - I know," said Dorothea, hastily.
"I did not choose to accept an income from such a source.
Why should he mind saying anything of that sort to her now?
She knew that he had avowed his love for her?
"I felt that"-he broke off, nevertheless.
"I mean, in my truth to you.
He was not much afraid of anything that she might feel now.
Leaves and little branches were hurled about, and the thunder was getting nearer.
Dorothea began to say what she had been thinking of.
He was silent a moment, and then said passionately -.
"There is no hope for me," said Will.
It is impossible for us ever to belong to each other.
"Don't be sorry," said Dorothea, in her clear tender tones.
"I would rather share all the trouble of our parting.
Her lips trembled, and so did his.
But when the rain was quiet, Dorothea turned to look at Will.
"Yes, it must," said Will, angrily.
You may see beyond the misery of it, but I don't.
We can never be married.
"Some time - we might," said Dorothea, in a trembling voice.
"What is the use of counting on any success of mine?
I can see that clearly enough.
Will was looking out of the window angrily.
The ladies also talked politics, though more fitfully.
Lady Chettam thought that such conduct was very reprehensible, and remembered that Mrs.
Truberry's mother was a Miss Walsingham of Melspring.
Celia confessed it was nicer to be "Lady" than "Mrs.
I never wished his father to be anything else than Sir James.
"Oh, I only meant about Arthur's little tooth," said Celia, comfortably.
"But see, here is my uncle coming.
She tripped off to meet her uncle, while Sir James and Mr.
Cadwallader came forward to make one group with the ladies.
Brooke, with a mild distractedness of manner.
"Thrown out, you know, eh?
The Lords are going too far, though?
They'll have to pull up.
I mean, here at home - sad news.
But you must not blame me, Chettam.
"Not another gamekeeper shot, I hope?
Brooke was evidently in a state of nervous perturbation.
Cadwallader, impatient of this drivelling, said -.
"I'm dying to know the sad news.
The gamekeeper is not shot: that is settled.
"Well, it's a very trying thing, you know," said Mr.
I've got to break it to you, my dear.
Brooke looked at Celia-"You've no notion what it is, you know.
There's something singular in things: they come round, you know.
She had seated herself on a low stool against her husband's knee.
"For God's sake let us hear what it is!" said Sir James.
"Exactly," said Sir James, hastily.
"Dorothea is going to be married again, you know," said Mr.
Sir James was almost white with anger, but he did not speak.
Brooke nodded, saying, "Yes; to Ladislaw," and then fell into a prudential silence.
"You see, Humphrey!" said Mrs.
Cadwallader, waving her arm towards her husband.
YOU supposed that the young gentleman was gone out of the country.
"So he might be, and yet come back," said the Rector, quietly.
"When did you learn this?
Dorothea sent for me, you know.
There's something singular in things.
But Dorothea is quite determined - it is no use opposing.
I put it strongly to her.
I did my duty, Chettam.
But she can act as she likes, you know.
"Really, James, that would have been very disagreeable," said Celia.
Look at the affair more quietly," said Mr.
Cadwallader, sorry to see his good-natured friend so overmastered by anger.
However, I am not surprised.
The day after Casaubon's funeral I said what ought to be done.
But I was not listened to.
"You wanted what was impossible, you know, Chettam," said Mr.
"You wanted him shipped off.
He was a remarkable fellow-I always said he was a remarkable fellow.
We are indebted to that for his being lodged in this neighborhood.
" Sir James ended emphatically, turning aside and crossing his leg.
"I pointed everything out to her," said Mr.
Brooke, apologetically-"I mean the poverty, and abandoning her position.
' I put it strongly to her.
But I advise you to talk to Dorothea herself.
The fact is, she has a dislike to Casaubon's property.
You will hear what she says, you know.
"I cannot bear to see her again; it is too painful.
"Yes, I do," answered Sir James.
"I think that Dorothea commits a wrong action in marrying Ladislaw.
Sir James took out his handkerchief and began to bite the corner.
"She said she NEVER WOULD marry again-not anybody at all.
"Oh, there is usually a silent exception in such cases," said Mrs.
"The only wonder to me is, that any of you are surprised.
You did nothing to hinder it.
There was no safety in anything else.
Casaubon had prepared all this as beautifully as possible.
"He's not a man we can take into the family.
"Well, you know, Chettam," said Mr.
Brooke, good-humoredly, nursing his leg, "I can't turn my back on Dorothea.
I must be a father to her up to a certain point.
I said, `My dear, I won't refuse to give you away.
' I had spoken strongly before.
But I can cut off the entail, you know.
He had touched a motive of which Sir James was ashamed.
He was convinced that the marriage was a fatal one for Dorothea.
Brooke's propitiation was more clogging to his tongue than Mr.
"In three weeks, you know," said Mr.
" - I - should not make any fuss about it.
If she likes to be poor, that is her affair.
Plenty of beneficed clergy are poorer than they will be.
"Humphrey, that is all sophistry, and you know it," said his wife.
"Everything is all one - that is the beginning and end with you.
"And a clergyman too," observed Lady Chettam with approbation.
"Elinor cannot be said to have descended below her rank.
It is difficult to say what Mr.
Celia looked up at him like a thoughtful kitten.
"It must be admitted that his blood is a frightful mixture!" said Mrs.
-and then an old clo - "?
"Nonsense, Elinor," said the Rector, rising.
"It is time for us to go.
"After all, he is a pretty sprig," said Mrs.
Cadwallader, rising too, and wishing to make amends.
"He is like the fine old Crichley portraits before the idiots came in.
"I'll go with you," said Mr.
Brooke, starting up with alacrity.
"You will, James - won't you?
" said Celia, taking her husband's hand?
"That is to say, if it is not to meet anybody else.
"No, no, no," said Mr.
"Dorothea would not come, you know, unless you had been to see her.
" he answered, with some surprise?
"Yes, it is very important," said Celia.
"Remember, Celia, I cannot see her," said Sir James.
"Not if she gave up marrying?
"What is the use of saying that?
- however, I'm going to the stables?
I'll tell Briggs to bring the carriage round.
And Celia the matron naturally felt more able to advise her childless sister.
"I almost thought you would not come to me.
"You have disappointed us all so.
I have never carried out any plan yet.
"Because you always wanted things that wouldn't do.
But other plans would have come.
And how can you marry Mr.
Ladislaw, that we none of us ever thought you COULD marry?
It shocks James so dreadfully?
And then it is all so different from what you have always been.
Ladislaw, who has got no estate or anything.
"Well, it is very serious, Dodo," said Celia, becoming more impressive.
and you will go away among queer people?
But you always were wrong: only I can't help loving you.
And nobody can think where you will live: where can you go?
"I am going to London," said Dorothea.
"How can you always live in a street?
And you will be so poor?
"Bless you, Kitty," said Dorothea, with gentle warmth.
"Take comfort: perhaps James will forgive me some time.
And you would not do what nobody thought you could do.
Ladislaw a proper husband for you.
And you SAID YOU would never be married again.
But this is what I am going to do.
I have promised to marry Mr.
Ladislaw; and I am going to marry him.
I am very fond of him.
"That is nice," said Celia, comfortably.
Dorothea smiled, and Celia looked rather meditative.
Presently she said, "I cannot think how it all came about.
" Celia thought it would be pleasant to hear the story.
"I dare say not," said-Dorothea, pinching her sister's chin.
" said Celia, settling her arms cozily?
He hesitated before he said -.
Lydgate has virtually rejected any further service from me.
He has returned the thousand pounds which I lent him.
Casaubon advanced him the sum for that purpose.
The letter seemed to cut Mrs.
It had aged to keep sad company with his own withered features.
Urged into some effort at comforting her, he said -.
Would it be a satisfaction to you?
"Yes, it would," said Mrs.
Bulstrode, with some return of energy.
We have always been brother and sister.
"You must make the proposal to Garth yourself, Harriet," said Mr.
Communications can be made through Standish.
I mention this, because Garth gave up being my agent.
Have you had your dinner?
Garth's meals were much subordinated to "business.
"Oh yes, a good dinner - cold mutton and I don't know what.
"In the garden with Letty, I think.
"Fred is not come yet?
Are you going out again without taking tea, Caleb?
"No, no; I'm only going to Mary a minute.
"I came to look for you, Mary," said Mr.
"Let us-walk about a bit.
Caleb screwed up his mouth and turned his head aside wisely.
"Now, father, you did praise him last Wednesday.
" said Caleb, rather slyly?
"You like things to be neatly booked.
"Ay, ay; you want to coax me into thinking him a fine match.
I don't love him because he is a fine match.
"Oh, dear, because I have always loved him.
"Your mind is quite settled, then, Mary?
" said Caleb, returning to his first tone?
"My feelings have not changed, father," said Mary, calmly.
We must wait for each other a long while; but Fred knows that.
"How can that ever be, father?
"He would manage it for his aunt Bulstrode.
The poor woman has been to me begging and praying.
"Oh, Fred would be so happy! It is too good to believe.
Fred had need be careful.
"Perhaps it is too much, father," said Mary, checked in her joy.
"There would be no happiness in bringing you any fresh trouble.
"Nay, nay; work is my delight, child, when it doesn't vex your mother.
"Nonsense, child; you'll think your husband better.
"You are not learning economy.
"Now that is too bad, Mary," said Fred.
I am saving up three suits - one for a wedding-suit.
"Oh no, they will keep two years.
"Two years! be reasonable, Fred," said Mary, turning to walk.
One lives on them better than on unflattering ones?
I am out of spirits.
My father is so cut up - home is not like itself.
I can't bear any more bad news.
"You don't mean anything except nonsense, Mary?
" said Fred, coloring slightly nevertheless?
"Pray don't joke, Mary," said Fred, with strong feeling.
"Fred and Mary! are you ever coming in?
- or may I eat your cake?
Every limit is a beginning as well as an ending.
Fred surprised his neighbors in various ways.
Moreover, Fred remained unswervingly steady.
Lydgate's hair never became white.
Rosamond never committed a second compromising indiscretion.
In brief, Lydgate was what is called a successful man.
Rosamond had a placid but strong answer to such speeches.
Why then had he chosen her?
It was a pity he had not had Mrs?
Ladislaw, whom he was always praising and placing above her.
And thus the conversation ended with the advantage on Rosamond's side.
During the months of this correspondence Mr.
But that morning something exciting had happened at the Hall.
"Dorothea has a little boy.
And you will not let me go and see her.
And I am sure she wants to see me.
And they thought she would die.
"Good heavens, Celia!" said Sir James, much wrought upon, "what do you wish?
I will do anything you like?
I will take you to town to-morrow if you wish it.
" And Celia did wish it.
It was after this that Mr.
I would let things remain as they are.
Where women love each other, men learn to smother their mutual dislike.
It became an understood thing that Mr.
Certainly those determining acts of her life were not ideally beautiful.
